THE SHORTER LION'S ROAR DISCOURSE
CŪḶASĪHANĀDA SUTTA  Majjhima Nikāya 11

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There he addressed the monks: 'Monks!'

'Yes, lord,' the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, 'Monks, 'Right here there is the contemplative, here there is the contemplative of the second order, here there is the contemplative of the third order, here there is the contemplative of the fourth order. Other teachings are empty of knowledgeable contemplatives': Thus you rightly roar a lion's roar.

'Now, there exists the possibility, monks, that wanderers of other sects might say, 'But what is your assurance, what is your strength, on the basis of which, seeing it within yourselves, you venerable ones say, 'Right here there is the contemplative, here there is the contemplative of the second order, here there is the contemplative of the third order, here there is the contemplative of the fourth order. Other teachings are empty of knowledgeable contemplatives'?'

'The wanderers of other sects saying that should be told this: 'Friends, there are four qualities pointed out by the Blessed One—the One Who Knows, the One Who Sees, the Worthy One, Rightly Self-awakened—that, seeing them within ourselves, we say, 'Right here there is the contemplative, here there is the contemplative of the second order, here there is the contemplative of the third order, here there is the contemplative of the fourth order. Other teachings are empty of knowledgeable contemplatives.' Which four? We have confidence in our Teacher, we have confidence in the Dhamma, we have virtues that we have made complete, and our companions in the Dhamma—both lay & those gone forth—are dear and agreeable to us. These are the four qualities pointed out by the Blessed One—the One Who Knows, the One Who Sees, the Worthy One, Rightly Self-awakened—that, seeing them within ourselves, we say, 'Right here there is the contemplative, here there is the contemplative of the second order, here there is the contemplative of the third order, here there is the contemplative of the fourth order. Other teachings are empty of knowledgeable contemplatives.'

'Now, there exists the possibility, monks, that wanderers of other sects might say, 'But we, too, friends, have confidence in our Teacher, we, too, have confidence in the Dhamma, we, too, have virtues that we have made complete, and our companions in the Dhamma—both lay & those gone forth—are dear and agreeable to us as well. So what difference, what distinction, what distinguishing factor is there between you and us?'

'The wanderers of other sects saying that should be told this: 'But, friends, is the goal one or many?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is one, not many.'

'And friends, is that goal for one with passion or for one without passion?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one without passion, not for one with passion.'

'And friends, is that goal for one with aversion or for one without aversion?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one without aversion, not for one with aversion.'

'And friends, is that goal for one with delusion or for one without delusion?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one without delusion, not for one with delusion.'

'And friends, is that goal for one with craving or for one without craving?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one without craving, not for one with craving.'

'And friends, is that goal for one with clinging or for one without clinging?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one without clinging, not for one with clinging.'

'And friends, is that goal for one who is wise or for one who is foolish?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one who is wise, not for one who is foolish.'

'And friends, is that goal for one who embraces & rejects or for one who doesn't embrace & reject?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one who doesn't embrace & reject, not for one who embraces & rejects.'

'And friends, is that goal for one who finds pleasure & delight in objectification or for one who finds pleasure & delight in non-objectification?' Rightly answering, the wanderers of other sects would answer, 'The goal is for one who finds pleasure & delight in non-objectification, not for one who finds pleasure and delight in objectification.'

'Monks, there are these two views: the view of becoming and the view of non-becoming. Now, those contemplatives & brahmans who are attached to the view of becoming, who hold to the view of becoming, who relish the view of becoming reject the view of non-becoming. Whereas those contemplatives & brahmans who are attached to the view of non-becoming, who hold to the view of non-becoming, who relish the view of non-becoming reject the view of becoming.

'And those contemplatives & brahmans who don't discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the passing away, the allure, the drawbacks of—or the escape from—these two views: They are with passion, with aversion, with delusion, with craving, with clinging. They are foolish; they embrace & reject; they find pleasure & delight in objectification. They are not released, from birth, aging, & death, from sorrows, lamentations, pains, distresses, & despairs. They are not released, I tell you, from suffering & stress.

'Whereas those contemplatives & brahmans who do discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the passing away, the allure, the drawbacks of—and the escape from—these two views: They are without passion, without aversion, without delusion, without craving, without clinging. They are wise; they don't embrace & reject; they find pleasure & delight in non-objectification. They are released, from birth, aging, & death, from sorrows, lamentations, pains, distresses, & despairs. They are released, I tell you, from suffering & stress.

'Monks, there are these four clingings. Which four? Sensuality clinging, view clinging, habit-&-practice clinging, and doctrine-of-self clinging.

'There are some contemplatives & brahmans who, though claiming doctrines that comprehend all types of clinging, don't rightly describe the comprehension of all types of clinging. They describe the comprehension of sensuality clinging, but not the comprehension of view clinging, habit-&-practice clinging, or doctrine-of-self clinging. Why is that? Because these contemplatives & brahmans don't discern these three instances as they have come to be. That's why, though claiming doctrines that comprehend all types of clinging, they don't rightly describe the comprehension of all types of clinging. They describe the comprehension of sensuality clinging, but not the comprehension of view clinging, habit-&-practice clinging, or doctrine-of-self clinging.

'There are some contemplatives & brahmans who, though claiming doctrines that comprehend all types of clinging, don't rightly describe the comprehension of all types of clinging. They describe the comprehension of sensuality clinging and view clinging, but not the comprehension of habit-&-practice clinging or doctrine-of-self clinging. Why is that? Because these contemplatives & brahmans don't discern these two instances as they have come to be. That's why, though claiming doctrines that comprehend all types of clinging, they don't rightly describe the comprehension of all types of clinging. They describe the comprehension of sensuality clinging and view clinging, but not the comprehension of habit-&-practice clinging or doctrine-of-self clinging.

'There are some contemplatives & brahmans who, though claiming doctrines that comprehend all types of clinging, don't rightly describe the comprehension of all types of clinging. They describe the comprehension of sensuality clinging, view clinging, and habit-&-practice clinging, but not the comprehension of doctrine-of-self clinging. Why is that? Because these contemplatives & brahmans don't discern that one instance as it has come to be. That's why, though claiming doctrines that comprehend all types of clinging, they don't rightly describe the comprehension of all types of clinging. They describe the comprehension of sensuality clinging, view clinging, and habit-&-practice clinging, but not the comprehension of doctrine-of-self clinging.

'In a doctrine & discipline of this sort, monks, it's obvious that confidence in the teacher is not rightly directed, confidence in the doctrine is not rightly directed, the completion of virtues is not rightly directed, and the dearness & agreeability of one's companions is not rightly directed. Why is that? Because that's how it is, monks, in a poorly proclaimed doctrine & discipline—poorly expounded, not leading out, not leading to calm, expounded by one not rightly self-awakened.

'But the Tathāgata, monks—the Worthy One, the Rightly Self-awakened One—claiming a doctrine that comprehends all types of clinging, rightly describes the comprehension of all types of clinging. He describes the comprehension of sensuality clinging, view clinging, habit-&-practice clinging, and doctrine-of-self clinging.

'In a Dhamma & Vinaya of this sort, monks, it's obvious that confidence in the teacher is rightly directed, confidence in the doctrine is rightly directed, the completion of virtues is rightly directed, and the dearness & agreeability of one's companions is rightly directed. Why is that? Because that's how it is, monks, in a well-proclaimed Dhamma & Vinaya—well expounded, leading out, leading to calm, expounded by One Rightly Self-awakened.

'Now, these four clingings, monks, have what as their cause, what as their origination, what as their birth, what as their coming-into-existence? These four clingings have craving as their cause, craving as their origination, craving as their birth, craving as their coming-into-existence.

'And this craving has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its birth, what as its coming-into-existence? Craving has feeling as its cause, feeling as its origination, feeling as its birth, feeling as its coming-into-existence.

'And this feeling has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its birth, what as its coming-into-existence? Feeling has contact as its cause, contact as its origination, contact as its birth, contact as its coming-into-existence.

'And this contact has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its birth, what as its coming-into-existence? Contact has the six sense media as its cause, the six sense media as its origination, the six sense media as its birth, the six sense media as its coming-into-existence.

'And these six sense media have what as their cause, what as their origination, what as their birth, what as their coming-into-existence? The six sense media have name-&-form as their cause, name-&-form as their origination, name-&-form as their birth, name-&-form as their coming-into-existence.

'And this name-&-form has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its birth, what as its coming-into-existence? Name-&-form has consciousness as its cause, consciousness as its origination, consciousness as its birth, consciousness as its coming-into-existence.

'And this consciousness has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its birth, what as its coming-into-existence? Consciousness has fabrications as its cause, fabrications as its origination, fabrications as its birth, fabrications as its coming-into-existence.

'And these fabrications have what as their cause, what as their origination, what as their birth, what as their coming-into-existence? Fabrications have ignorance as their cause, ignorance as their origination, ignorance as their birth, ignorance as their coming-into-existence.

'Now, when ignorance has been abandoned and clear-knowing has arisen in a monk, then from dispassion for ignorance and from the arising of clear-knowing, he clings neither to sensuality clinging, to view clinging, to habit-&-practice clinging, nor to doctrine-of-self clinging. Not clinging, he is not agitated. Not agitated, he fully unbinds right within. He discerns: 'Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world.'

That is what the Blessed One said. Gratified, the monks delighted in the Blessed One's words.