THE PURIFICATION OF ALMSFOOD
PIṆḌAPĀTAPĀRISUDDHI SUTTA  Majjhima Nikāya 151

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Forest, the Squirrels' Sanctuary. Then Venerable Sāriputta, emerging from his seclusion in the late afternoon, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, 'Clear, Sāriputta, are your faculties—pure your complexion, and bright. In which [meditative] dwelling do you often now dwell?'

'Lord, I often now dwell in a dwelling of emptiness.'

'Excellent, Sāriputta. Excellent. You often now dwell in the dwelling of a great man, for this is the dwelling of a great man: i e, emptiness.

'Sāriputta, if a monk should wish, 'May I often dwell in a dwelling of emptiness,' then he should consider: 'On the path by which I entered the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the village for alms, was there in my mind any desire, passion, aversion, delusion, or irritation for forms cognizable via the eye?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'On the path by which I entered the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the village for alms, there was in my mind desire, passion, aversion, delusion, or irritation for forms cognizable via the eye,' then he should make an effort for the abandoning of those evil, unskillful qualities. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'On the path by which I entered the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the village for alms, there was in my mind no desire, passion, aversion, delusion, or irritation for forms cognizable via the eye,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'On the path by which I entered the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the village for alms, was there in my mind any desire, passion, aversion, delusion, or irritation for sounds cognizable via the ear… aromas cognizable via the nose… flavors cognizable via the tongue… tactile sensations cognizable via the body… ideas cognizable via the intellect?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'On the path by which I entered the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the village for alms, there was in my mind desire, passion, aversion, delusion, or irritation for ideas cognizable via the intellect,' then he should make an effort for the abandoning of those evil, unskillful qualities. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'On the path by which I entered the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the village for alms, there was in my mind no desire, passion, aversion, delusion, or irritation for ideas cognizable via the intellect,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are the five strings of sensuality abandoned in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'The five strings of sensuality are not abandoned in me,' he should make an effort for the abandoning of the five strings of sensuality. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'The five strings of sensuality are abandoned in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are the five hindrances abandoned in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'The five hindrances are not abandoned in me,' he should make an effort for the abandoning of the five hindrances. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'The five hindrances are abandoned in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are the five clinging-aggregates comprehended by me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'The five clinging-aggregates are not comprehended by me,' he should make an effort for the comprehension of the five clinging-aggregates. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'The five clinging-aggregates are comprehended by me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are the four establishings of mindfulness developed in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'The four establishings of mindfulness are not developed in me,' he should make an effort for the development of the four establishings of mindfulness. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'The four establishings of mindfulness are developed in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are the four right exertions… the four bases of power… the five faculties… the five strengths… the seven factors for awakening developed in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'The seven factors for awakening are not developed in me,' he should make an effort for the development of the seven factors for awakening. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'The seven factors for awakening are developed in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Is the noble eightfold path developed in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'The noble eightfold path is not developed in me,' he should make an effort for the development of the noble eightfold path. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'The noble eightfold path is developed in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are tranquility & insight developed in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'Tranquility & insight are not developed in me,' he should make an effort for the development of tranquility & insight. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'Tranquility & insight are developed in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Further, the monk should consider: 'Are clear knowing & release realized in me?' If, on reflection, he knows, 'Clear knowing & release are not realized in me,' he should make an effort for the realization of clear knowing & release. But if, on reflection, he knows, 'Clear knowing & release are realized in me,' then he should dwell in refreshment & joy, training day & night in skillful qualities.

'Sāriputta, all those contemplatives & brahmans in the course of the past who purified their almsfood, did so through repeated reflection in just this way.

'All those contemplatives & brahmans in the course of the future who will purify their almsfood, will do so through repeated reflection in just this way.

'All those contemplatives & brahmans at present who purify their almsfood, do so through repeated reflection in just this way.

'Thus, Sāriputta, you should train yourselves: 'We will purify our almsfood through repeated reflection.' That's how you should train yourselves.'

That is what the Blessed One said. Gratified, Venerable Sāriputta delighted in the Blessed One's words.