Udāna 2:10 BHADDIYA KĀḶIGODHA (KĀḶIGODHA SUTTA)

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Anupiyā in the Mango Grove. And on that occasion, Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāḷigodhā's son, on going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, would repeatedly exclaim, 'What bliss! What bliss!'

A large number of monks heard Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāḷigodhā's son, on going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, repeatedly exclaim, 'What bliss! What bliss!' and on hearing him, the thought occurred to them, 'There's no doubt but that Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāḷigodhā's son, doesn't enjoy leading the holy life, for when he was a householder he knew the bliss of kingship, so that now, on recollecting that when going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, he is repeatedly exclaiming, 'What bliss! What bliss!'

So they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they told him, 'Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāḷigodhā's son, lord, on going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, repeatedly exclaims, 'What bliss! What bliss!' There's no doubt but that Venerable Bhaddiya doesn't enjoy leading the holy life, for when he was a householder he knew the bliss of kingship, so that now, on recollecting that when going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, he is repeatedly exclaiming, 'What bliss! What bliss!'

Then the Blessed One told a certain monk, 'Come, monk. In my name, call Bhaddiya, saying, 'The Teacher calls you, friend Bhaddiya.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, the monk went to Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāḷigodhā's son, and on arrival he said to him, 'The Teacher calls you, friend Bhaddiya.'

Responding, 'As you say, my friend,' to the monk, Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāḷigodhā's son, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, 'Is it true, Bhaddiya that–on going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling–you repeatedly exclaim, 'What bliss! What bliss!'?'

'Yes, lord.'

'What compelling reason do you have in mind that–when going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling–you repeatedly exclaim, 'What bliss! What bliss!'?'

'Before, when I has a householder, maintaining the bliss of kingship, lord, I had guards posted within and without the royal apartments, within and without the city, within and without the countryside. But even though I was thus guarded, thus protected, I dwelled in fear–agitated, distrustful, & afraid. But now, on going alone to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, I dwell without fear, unagitated, confident, & unafraid–unconcerned, unruffled, living on the gifts of others, with my mind like a wild deer. This is the compelling reason I have in mind that–when going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling–I repeatedly exclaim, 'What bliss! What bliss!'

Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:

From whose heart

there is no provocation,

& for whom becoming & non-becoming

are overcome,

he–

beyond fear,

blissful,

with no grief–

is one the devas can't see.