Udāna 3:10 SURVEYING THE WORLD (LOKA SUTTA)

I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvelā on the bank of the Nerañjarā River at the root of the Bodhi tree–the tree of awakening–newly awakened. And on that occasion he sat at the root of the Bodhi tree for seven days in one session, sensitive to the bliss of release. Then, with the passing of seven days, after emerging from that concentration, he surveyed the world with the eye of an Awakened One. As he did so, he saw living beings burning with the many fevers and aflame with the many fires born of passion, aversion, & delusion.

Then, on realizing the significance of that, he on that occasion exclaimed:

This world is burning.

Afflicted by contact,

it calls disease a 'self.'

By whatever means it supposes [anything],

it becomes otherwise than that.

Becoming otherwise,

the world is

attached to becoming,

afflicted by becoming,

and yet delights

in that very becoming.

Where there's delight,

there is fear.

What one fears

is stressful.

This holy life is lived

for the abandoning of becoming.

Whatever contemplatives or brahmans say that liberation from becoming is by means of becoming, all of them are not released from becoming, I say.

And whatever contemplatives or brahmans say that escape from becoming is by means of non-becoming, all of them have not escaped from becoming, I say.

For this stress comes into play

in dependence on every acquisition.

With the ending of every clinging or sustenance,

there's no stress coming into play.

Look at this world:

Beings, afflicted with thick ignorance,

are unreleased

from passion for what has come to be.

All levels of becoming,

anywhere,

in any way,

are inconstant, stressful, subject to change.

Seeing this–as it's come to be–

with right discernment,

one abandons craving for becoming

and doesn't delight in non-becoming.

From the total ending of craving

comes fading & cessation without remainder:

unbinding.

For the monk unbound

through lack of clinging or sustenance,

there's no further becoming.

He has conquered Māra,

won the battle,

having gone beyond becomings

: Such.