Udāna 6:10 THEY APPEAR (UPPAJJANTI SUTTA)

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī at Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Venerable Ānanda went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, 'Lord, as long as Tathāgatas–worthy & rightly self-awakened–do not appear in the world, that's when the wanderers of other sects are worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage–recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. But when Tathāgatas–worthy & rightly self-awakened–appear in the world, that's when the wanderers of other sects are not worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, or given homage; nor are they recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. Now only the Blessed One is worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage–a recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick–along with the community of monks.'

'That's how it is, Ānanda. That's how it is. As long as Tathāgatas–worthy & rightly self-awakened–do not appear in the world, that's when the wanderers of other sects are worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage–recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. But when Tathāgatas–worthy & rightly self-awakened–appear in the world, that's when the wanderers of other sects are not worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, or given homage; nor are they recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. Now only the Tathāgata is worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage–a recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick–along with the community of monks.'

Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:

The glowworm shines

as long as the sun hasn't risen.

But when that splendor rises,

the glowworm's light is destroyed.

It no longer shines.

Likewise, sectarians shine

as long as those rightly awakened

don't appear in the world.

Those logicians aren't purified,

nor are their disciples.

Those of bad views

aren't released

from stress.