INCAPABLE
ABHABBA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 10:76

'Monks, if these three things were not to be found in the world, the Tathāgata—the worthy one, rightly self-awakened—would not appear in the world, and the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Tathāgata would not shine in the world. Which three? Birth, aging, & death. If these three things were not to be found in the world, the Tathāgata—the worthy one, rightly self-awakened—would not appear in the world, and the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Tathāgata would not shine in the world. But because these three things are to be found in the world, the Tathāgata—the worthy one, rightly self-awakened—has appeared in the world, and the Dhamma & Vinaya proclaimed by the Tathāgata shines in the world.

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning birth, abandoning aging, abandoning death. Which three? Passion, aversion, & delusion: Without abandoning these three things, one is incapable of abandoning birth, abandoning aging, abandoning death.

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning passion, abandoning aversion, abandoning delusion. Which three? Self-identification views, uncertainty, & grasping at habits & practices: Without abandoning these three things, one is incapable of abandoning passion, abandoning aversion, abandoning delusion.

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning self-identification views, abandoning uncertainty, abandoning grasping at habits & practices. Which three? Inappropriate attention, following a wrong path, & slowness of awareness…

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning inappropriate attention, abandoning the following of a wrong path, abandoning slowness of awareness. Which three? Muddled truth, unalertness, & scattered awareness…

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning muddled truth, abandoning unalertness, abandoning scattered awareness. Which three? A lack of desire to see the noble ones, a lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, & a mind bent on criticism…

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning a lack of desire to see the noble ones, abandoning a lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, abandoning a mind bent on criticism. Which three? Restlessness, a lack of restraint, & poor virtue …

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning restlessness, abandoning a lack of restraint, abandoning poor virtue. Which three? A lack of conviction, stinginess, & laziness…

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning a lack of conviction, abandoning stinginess, abandoning laziness. Which three? Apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship…

'Without abandoning three things, one is incapable of abandoning apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship. Which three? Being shameless, lacking compunction, & being heedless. Without abandoning these three things, one is incapable of abandoning apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship.

'Monks, being shameless & lacking compunction, one is heedless.

'Being heedless, one is incapable of abandoning apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship.

'Having evil friendship, one is incapable of abandoning a lack of conviction, stinginess, & laziness.

'Being lazy, one is incapable of abandoning restlessness, a lack of restraint, & poor virtue.

'Being unvirtuous, one is incapable of abandoning a lack of desire to see the noble ones, a lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, a mind bent on criticism.

'Having a mind bent on criticism, one is incapable of abandoning muddled truth, unalertness, & scattered awareness.

'Having scattered awareness, one is incapable of abandoning inappropriate attention, the following of a wrong path, & slowness of awareness.

'Having slow awareness, one is incapable of abandoning self-identification, uncertainty, & grasping at habits & practices.

'Being uncertain, one is incapable of abandoning passion, aversion, & delusion.

'Without abandoning passion, aversion, & delusion, one is incapable of abandoning birth, abandoning aging, abandoning death.

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning birth, abandoning aging, abandoning death. Which three? Passion, aversion, & delusion: Abandoning these three things, one is capable of abandoning birth, abandoning aging, abandoning death.

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning passion, abandoning aversion, abandoning delusion. Which three? Self-identification views, uncertainty, & grasping at habits & practices: Abandoning these three things, one is capable of abandoning passion, abandoning aversion, abandoning delusion.

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning self-identification views, abandoning uncertainty, abandoning grasping at habits & practices. Which three? Inappropriate attention, following a wrong path, & slowness of awareness…

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning inappropriate attention, abandoning the following of a wrong path, abandoning slowness of awareness. Which three? Muddled truth, unalertness, & scattered awareness…

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning muddled truth, abandoning unalertness, abandoning scattered awareness. Which three? A lack of desire to see the noble ones, a lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, & a mind bent on criticism…

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning a lack of desire to see the noble ones, abandoning a lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, abandoning a mind bent on criticism. Which three? Restlessness, a lack of restraint, & poor virtue …

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning restlessness, abandoning a lack of restraint, abandoning poor virtue. Which three? A lack of conviction, stinginess, & laziness…

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning a lack of conviction, abandoning stinginess, abandoning laziness. Which three? Apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship…

'Abandoning three things, one is capable of abandoning apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship. Which three? Being shameless, lacking compunction, & being heedless. Abandoning these three things, one is capable of abandoning apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship.

'Monks, having a sense of shame & having a sense of compunction, one is heedful.

'Being heedful, one is capable of abandoning apathy, being hard to correct, & evil friendship.

'Having admirable friendship, one is capable of abandoning a lack of conviction, stinginess, & laziness.

'Having aroused persistence, one is capable of abandoning restlessness, a lack of restraint, & poor virtue.

'Being virtuous, one is capable of abandoning a lack of desire to see the noble ones, a lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, a mind bent on criticism.

'Having a mind not bent on criticism, one is capable of abandoning muddled truth, unalertness, & scattered awareness.

'Having unscattered awareness, one is capable of abandoning inappropriate attention, the following of a wrong path, & slowness of awareness.

'Having quick awareness, one is capable of abandoning self-identification, uncertainty, & grasping at habits & practices.

'Being without uncertainty, one is capable of abandoning passion, aversion, & delusion.

'Abandoning passion, aversion, & delusion, one is capable of abandoning birth, abandoning aging, abandoning death.'