THORNS
KAṆṬHAKA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 10:72

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Vesālī at the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest together with many very well-known elder disciples: Venerable Pāla, Venerable Upapāla, Venerable Kakkaṭa, Venerable Kaḷimbha, Venerable Nikaṭa, Venerable Kaṭissaha, & other very well-known elder disciples. And on that occasion many very well-known Licchavis—racing after one another in auspicious vehicles, making a shrill noise, a great noise—plunged into the Great Forest to see the Blessed One.

Then the thought occurred to the venerable ones: 'These many very well-known Licchavis—racing after one another in auspicious vehicles, making a shrill noise, a great noise—are plunging into the Great Forest to see the Blessed One. Now, the jhānas are said by the Blessed One to be thorned by noise. What if we were to go to the Gosiṅga Sāla forest park? There we would live comfortably, with next-to-no noise, next-to-no crowding.' So the venerable ones went to Gosiṅga Sāla forest park. There they lived comfortably, with next-to-no noise, next-to-no crowding.

Then the Blessed One addressed the monks: 'Where is Pāla, monks? Where is Upapāla? Where is Kakkaṭa? Where is Kaḷimbha? Where is Nikaṭa? Where is Kaṭissaha? Where have those elder disciples gone?'

'Just now, lord, the thought occurred to those venerable ones, 'These many very well-known Licchavis—racing after one another in auspicious vehicles, making a shrill noise, a great noise—are plunging into the Great Forest to see the Blessed One. Now, the jhānas are said by the Blessed One to be thorned by noise. What if we were to go to the Gosiṅga Sāla forest park? There we would live comfortably, with next-to-no noise, next-to-no crowding.' So those venerable ones went to Gosiṅga Sāla forest park. There they are living comfortably, with next-to-no noise, next-to-no crowding.'

'Very good, monks, very good—what those great disciples, rightly declaring, have declared, for the jhānas have been said by me to be thorned by noise.

'Monks, there are these ten thorns. Which ten?

'For one who loves seclusion, love of entanglement is a thorn.

'For one committed to the theme of the unattractive, commitment to the theme of the attractive is a thorn.

'For one guarding the sense doors, watching a show is a thorn.

'For one practicing celibacy, nearness to women is a thorn.

'For the first jhāna, noise is a thorn.

'For the second jhāna, directed thoughts & evaluations are thorns.

'For the third jhāna, rapture is a thorn.

'For the fourth jhāna, in-and-out breaths are thorns.

'For the attainment of the cessation of perception & feeling, perception & feelings are thorns.

'Passion is a thorn. Aversion is a thorn. Delusion is a thorn.

'Dwell unthorned, monks! Dwell unthorned & dethorned! The arahants are unthorned, monks. The arahants are unthorned & dethorned.'