A SINGLE THING
EKADHAMMA SUTTAS  Aṅguttara Nikāya 1:21 TO 30, 39 TO 40

21. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when undeveloped, is as unpliant as the mind. The mind, when undeveloped, is unpliant.'

22. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when developed, is as pliant as the mind. The mind, when developed, is pliant.'

23. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when undeveloped, leads to such great harm as the mind. The mind, when undeveloped, leads to great harm.'

24. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when developed, leads to such great benefit as the mind. The mind, when developed, leads to great benefit.'

25. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when undeveloped & unapparent, leads to such great harm as the mind. The mind, when undeveloped & unapparent, leads to great harm.'

26. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when developed & apparent, leads to such great benefit as the mind. The mind, when developed & apparent, leads to great benefit.'

27. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when undeveloped & uncultivated, leads to such great harm as the mind. The mind, when undeveloped & uncultivated, leads to great harm.'

28. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when developed & cultivated, leads to such great benefit as the mind. The mind, when developed & cultivated, leads to great benefit.'

29. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when undeveloped & uncultivated, brings about such suffering & stress as the mind. The mind, when undeveloped & uncultivated, brings about suffering & stress.'

30. 'I don't envision a single thing that, when developed & cultivated, brings about such happiness as the mind. The mind, when developed & cultivated, brings about happiness.'

39. 'I don't envision a single thing that—when untamed, unguarded, unprotected, unrestrained—leads to such great harm as the mind. The mind—when untamed, unguarded, unprotected, unrestrained—leads to great harm.'

40. 'I don't envision a single thing that—when tamed, guarded, protected, restrained—leads to such great benefit as the mind. The mind—when tamed, guarded, protected, restrained—leads to great benefit.'