LIKE-MINDED
SAMACITTA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 2:35

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. And on that occasion Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Migāra's mother. There he addressed the monks, 'Friend monks!'

'Yes, friend,' the monks responded to him.

Venerable Sāriputta said, 'Friends, I will teach you the person fettered outside & the person fettered inside. Listen to that & pay careful attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, friend,' the monks responded to him.

Venerable Sāriputta said, 'And which, friends, is the person fettered inside? There is the case where a monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults. He—with the breakup of the body, after death—reappears in a certain deva-host. Falling from there, he is a returner, one who returns to this state of being. This is called a person fettered inside, a returner, one who returns to this state of being.

'And which is the person fettered outside? There is the case where a monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults. He enters & remains in a certain peaceful awareness release. He—with the breakup of the body, after death—reappears in a certain deva-host. Falling from there, he is a non-returner, one who doesn't return to this state of being. This is called a person fettered outside, a non-returner, one who doesn't return to this state of being.

'Then again, a monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults. He is one who practices for disenchantment for, dispassion for, & the cessation of sensuality. He is one who practices for disenchantment for, dispassion for, & the cessation of becoming. He is one who practices for the ending of craving. He is one who practices for the ending of greed. He—with the breakup of the body, after death—reappears in a certain deva-host. Falling from there, he is a non-returner, one who doesn't return to this state of being. This is called a person fettered outside, a non-returner, one who doesn't return to this state of being.'

Then many Like-minded Devas went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, stood to one side. As they were standing there, they said to him, 'Lord, Venerable Sāriputta, in the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Migāra's mother, is teaching the monks about the person fettered inside & the person fettered outside. The assembly is overjoyed. It would be good, lord, if the Blessed One went to Venerable Sāriputta, out of sympathy.'

The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.

Then—just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm—the Blessed One disappeared from Jeta's Grove and re-appeared in the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Migāra's mother, right in front of Venerable Sāriputta. He sat down on a seat laid out. Venerable Sāriputta, bowing down to the Blessed One, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, 'Just now, Sāriputta, many Like-minded Devas went to me and, on arrival, having bowed down to me, stood to one side. As they were standing there, they said to me, 'Lord, Venerable Sāriputta, in the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Migāra's mother, is teaching the monks about the person fettered inside & the person fettered outside. The assembly is overjoyed. It would be good, lord, if the Blessed One went to Venerable Sāriputta, out of sympathy.'

'Those devas, Sāriputta— whether there are ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty—can stand on an area the size of a hole pierced by the point of an awl and not disturb one another. And if the thought should occur to you, 'Surely it was there [in their heaven] that those devas developed such a mind-state that—whether there are ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty—they can stand on an area the size of a hole pierced by the point of an awl and not disturb one another,' it shouldn't be seen that way. It was right here that they developed such a mind-state that—whether there are ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty—they can stand on an area the size of a hole pierced by the point of an awl and not disturb one another.

'Therefore, Sāriputta, you should train yourselves, 'We will be peaceful in our faculties & peaceful in our hearts.' That's how you should train yourselves. When you are peaceful in your faculties & peaceful in your hearts, peaceful will be your bodily actions, peaceful your verbal actions, peaceful your mental actions. [Thinking,] 'We will render only peaceful service to our fellows in the holy life': That's how you should train yourselves.

'The wanderers of other sects are lost, Sāriputta, in that they don't get to hear this Dhamma sequence.'