AT KĀḶAKA'S PARK
KĀḶAKA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:24

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāketa in Kāḷaka's park. There he addressed the monks: 'Monks!'

'Yes, lord,' the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said: 'Monks, whatever in this world with its devas, Māras & Brahmās, in this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its rulers & commonfolk, is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, pondered by the intellect: That do I know. Whatever in this world with its devas, Māras & Brahmās, in this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its rulers & commonfolk, is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, pondered by the intellect: That I directly know. That has been realized by the Tathāgata, but in the Tathāgata it has not been established.

'If I were to say, 'I don't know whatever in this world… is seen, heard, sensed, cognized… pondered by the intellect,' that would be a falsehood in me. If I were to say, 'I both know and don't know whatever in this world… is seen, heard, sensed, cognized… pondered by the intellect,' that would be just the same. If I were to say, 'I neither know nor don't know whatever in this world… is seen, heard, sensed, cognized… pondered by the intellect,' that would be a fault in me.

'Thus, monks, the Tathāgata, when seeing what is to be seen, doesn't suppose an (object as) seen. He doesn't suppose an unseen. He doesn't suppose an (object) to-be-seen. He doesn't suppose a seer.

'When hearing.…

'When sensing.…

'When cognizing what is to be cognized, he doesn't suppose an (object as) cognized. He doesn't suppose an uncognized. He doesn't suppose an (object) to-be-cognized. He doesn't suppose a cognizer.

Thus, monks, the Tathāgata—being the same with regard to all phenomena that can be seen, heard, sensed, & cognized—is 'Such.' And I tell you: There is no other 'Such' higher or more sublime.

'Whatever is seen or heard or sensed

and fastened onto as true by others,

One who is Such—among the self-fettered—

would not further claim to be true or even false.

'Having seen well in advance that arrow

where generations are fastened & hung

—'I know, I see, that's just how it is!'—

there's nothing of the Tathāgata fastened.'