BY A SNAKE
AHINĀ SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:67

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now, at that time in Sāvatthī a certain monk had died after having been bitten by a snake. Then a large number of monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there they said to him, 'Lord, just now in Sāvatthī a certain monk died after having been bitten by a snake.'

'Then it's certain, monks, that that monk didn't suffuse the four royal snake lineages with a mind of goodwill. For if he had suffused the four royal snake lineages with a mind of goodwill, he would not have died after having been bitten by a snake. Which four? The Virūpakkha royal snake lineage, the Erāpatha royal snake lineage, the Chabyāputta royal snake lineage, the Dark Gotamaka royal snake lineage. It's certain that that monk didn't suffuse these four royal snake lineages with a mind of goodwill. For if he had suffused these four royal snake lineages with a mind of goodwill, he would not have died after having been bitten by a snake. I allow you, monks, to suffuse these four royal snake lineages with a mind of goodwill for the sake of self-guarding, self-safeguarding, self-protection.'

I have goodwill for the Virūpakkhas,

goodwill for the Erāpathas,

goodwill for the Chabyāputtas,

goodwill for the Dark Gotamakas.

I have goodwill for footless beings,

goodwill for two-footed beings,

goodwill for four-footed beings,

goodwill for many-footed beings.

May footless beings do me no harm.

May two-footed beings do me no harm.

May four-footed beings do me no harm.

May many-footed beings do me no harm.

May all creatures,

all breathing things,

all beings

—each & every one—

meet with good fortune.

May none of them come to any evil.

Limitless is the Buddha,

limitless the Dhamma,

limitless the Saṅgha.

There is a limit to creeping things:

snakes, scorpions, centipedes,

spiders, lizards, & rats.

I have made this safeguard,

I have made this protection.

May the beings depart.

I pay homage

to the Blessed One,

homage

to the seven

rightly self-awakened ones.