TRADE
VAṆIJJA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:79

Then Venerable Sāriputta went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, 'What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why a certain trade, when engaged in by some people, turns out a failure? What is the reason, what is the cause why the same sort of trade, when engaged in by other people, turns out not as intended? What is the reason, what is the cause why the same sort of trade, when engaged in by other people, turns out as intended? What is the reason, what is the cause why the same sort of trade, when engaged in by other people, turns out better than intended?'

'There is the case, Sāriputta, where a certain person, having gone to a contemplative or brahman, makes him an offer: 'Tell me, sir, what you need in terms of the (four) requisites.' But he doesn't give what he offered. If he passes away from there and comes here, then whatever trade he engages in, it turns out a failure.

'Then there is the case where a certain person, having gone to a contemplative or brahman, makes him an offer: 'Tell me, sir, what you need in terms of the (four) requisites.' But he gives him something other than what he intended by his offer. If he passes away from there and comes here, then whatever trade he engages in, it turns out not as intended.

'Then there is the case where a certain person, having gone to a contemplative or brahman, makes him an offer: 'Tell me, sir, what you need in terms of the (four) requisites.' He gives him what he intended by his offer. If he passes away from there and comes here, then whatever trade he engages in, it turns out as intended.

'Then there is the case where a certain person, having gone to a contemplative or brahman, makes him an offer: 'Tell me, sir, what you need in terms of the (four) requisites.' He gives him more than what he intended by his offer. If he passes away from there and comes here, then whatever trade he engages in, it turns out better than intended.

'This is the reason, Sāriputta, this is the cause why a certain trade, when engaged in by some people, turns out a failure; why the same sort of trade, when engaged in by other people, turns out not as intended; why the same sort of trade, when engaged in by other people, turns out as intended; why the same sort of trade, when engaged in by other people, turns out better than intended.'