WITH THE FLOW
ANUSOTA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:5

'These four types of individuals are to be found existing in the world. Which four? The individual who goes with the flow, the individual who goes against the flow, the individual who stands fast, and the one who has crossed over, gone beyond, who stands on firm ground: a brahman.

'And how is one an individual who goes with the flow? There is the case where an individual indulges in sensual passions and does evil deeds. This is called the individual who goes with the flow.

'And how is one an individual who goes against the flow? There is the case where an individual doesn't indulge in sensual passions and doesn't do evil deeds. Even though it may be with pain, even though it may be with sorrow, even though he may be crying, his face in tears, he lives the holy life that is perfect & pure. This is called the individual who goes against the flow.

'And how is one an individual who stands fast? There is the case where an individual, with the total ending of the five lower fetters, is due to arise spontaneously (in the Pure Abodes), there to be totally unbound, never again to return from that world. This is called the individual who stands fast.

'And how is one an individual who has crossed over, gone beyond, who stands on firm ground: a brahman? There is the case where an individual, through the ending of effluents, enters & remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & release of discernment, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here & now. This is called the individual who has crossed over, gone beyond, who stands on firm ground: a brahman.

'These are the four types of individuals to be found existing in the world.'

People unrestrained

in sensual passions,

not devoid

of passion,

indulging

in sensuality:

They return to birth & aging,

again & again—

seized by craving,

going with the flow.

Thus the enlightened one,

with mindfulness here established,

not indulging

in sensuality & evil,

though it may be with pain,

would abandon sensuality.

They call him

one who goes against

the flow.

Whoever,

having abandoned

the five defilements,

is

perfect in training,

not destined to fall back,

skilled in awareness,

with faculties composed:

He's called

one who stands fast

In one who, having known,

qualities high & low

have been destroyed,

have gone to their end,

do not exist:

He's called

a master of knowledge,

one who has      fulfilled the holy life,

gone to the world's end, gone

beyond.