THE SUBDUING OF PASSION
RĀGA-VINAYA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:96

'Monks, these four types of individuals are to be found existing in the world. Which four? The one who practices for his or her own benefit but not for that of others. The one who practices for the benefit of others but not for his or her own. The one who practices neither for his or her own benefit nor for that of others. The one who practices for his or her own benefit and for that of others.

'And how is one an individual who practices for his or her own benefit but not for that of others? There is the case where a certain individual practices for the subduing of passion within him or herself but doesn't encourage others in the subduing of passion; practices for the subduing of aversion within him or herself but doesn't encourage others in the subduing of aversion; practices for the subduing of delusion within him or herself but doesn't encourage others in the subduing of delusion. Such is the individual who practices for his or her own benefit but not for that of others.

'And how is one an individual who practices for the benefit of others but not for his or her own? There is the case where a certain individual doesn't practice for the subduing of passion within him or herself but encourages others in the subduing of passion; he or she doesn't practice for the subduing of aversion within him or herself but encourages others in the subduing of aversion; he or she doesn't practice for the subduing of delusion within him or herself but encourages others in the subduing of delusion. Such is the individual who practices for the benefit of others but not for his or her own.

'And how is one an individual who practices neither for his or her own benefit nor for that of others? There is the case where a certain individual doesn't practice for the subduing of passion within him or herself and doesn't encourage others in the subduing of passion; he or she doesn't practice for the subduing of aversion within him or herself and doesn't encourage others in the subduing of aversion; he or she doesn't practice for the subduing of delusion within him or herself and doesn't encourage others in the subduing of delusion. Such is the individual who practices neither for his or her own benefit nor for that of others.

'And how is one an individual who practices for his or her own benefit and for that of others? There is the case where a certain individual practices for the subduing of passion within him or herself and encourages others in the subduing of passion; practices for the subduing of aversion within him or herself and encourages others in the subduing of aversion; practices for the subduing of delusion within him or herself and encourages others in the subduing of delusion. Such is the individual who practices for his or her own benefit and for that of others.

'These are the four types of individuals to be found existing in the world.'