DETACHED
PAṬILĪNA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 4:38

'Monks, a monk who has shaken off idiosyncratic truths [pacceka-sacca], who has thoroughly given up searching, who is calmed in his bodily fabrication, is said to be detached.

'And how has a monk shaken off idiosyncratic truths? There is the case where a monk has shaken off the run-of-the-mill idiosyncratic truths of run-of-the-mill contemplatives & brahmans—in other words, 'The cosmos is eternal,' 'The cosmos is not eternal,' 'The cosmos is finite,' 'The cosmos is infinite,' 'The soul & the body are the same,' 'The soul is one thing and the body another,' 'After death a Tathāgata exists,' 'After death a Tathāgata does not exist,' 'After death a Tathāgata both does & does not exist,' 'After death a Tathāgata neither does nor does not exist.' All of these he has thrown off, shaken off, renounced, vomited up, let go, abandoned, relinquished. This is how a monk has shaken off idiosyncratic truths.

'And how has a monk thoroughly given up searching? There is the case where a monk has abandoned his search for sensuality, has abandoned his search for becoming, and has allayed his search for a holy life. This is how a monk has thoroughly given up searching.

'And how is a monk calmed in his bodily fabrication? There is the case where a monk, with the abandoning of pleasure & pain—as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress—enters & remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain. This is how a monk is calmed in his bodily fabrication.

'And how is a monk detached? There is the case where a monk's conceit, 'I am,' is abandoned, its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising. This is how a monk is detached.'

Sensuality-search, becoming-search,

together with the holy-life search—

i e, grasping at 'such is the truth'

based on an accumulation

of viewpoints:

Through the relinquishing of searches

& the abolishing of viewpoints

of one dispassionate to

all passion,

and released in the ending

of craving,

he, a monk

peaceful, mindful,

calmed, undefeated,

awakened

with the breaking-through of conceit,

is said to be

detached.