CESSATION
NIRODHA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:166

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks, 'Friends!'

'Yes, friend,' the monks responded to him.

Venerable Sāriputta said, 'Friends, there is the case where a monk—consummate in virtue, consummate in concentration, consummate in discernment—might enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is the possibility that if he does not gain gnosis in the here & now, then—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—he might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is that possibility.'

When this was said, Venerable Udāyin said to Venerable Sāriputta, 'That is impossible, friend Sāriputta. It cannot happen that a monk—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is not that possibility.'

A second time… A third time, Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks, 'Friends, there is the case where a monk—consummate in virtue, consummate in concentration, consummate in discernment—might enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is the possibility that if he does not gain gnosis in the here & now, then—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—he might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is that possibility.'

A third time, Venerable Udāyin said to Venerable Sāriputta, 'That is impossible, friend Sāriputta. It cannot happen that a monk—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is not that possibility.'

Then the thought occurred to Venerable Sāriputta, 'Venerable Udāyin contradicts me up to three times, yet no monk stands up for me. What if I were to go to the Blessed One?'

So Venerable Sāriputta went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he addressed the monks, 'Friends, there is the case where a monk—consummate in virtue, consummate in concentration, consummate in discernment—might enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is the possibility that if he does not gain gnosis in the here & now, then—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—he might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is that possibility.'

When this was said, Venerable Udāyin said to Venerable Sāriputta, 'That is impossible, friend Sāriputta. It cannot happen that a monk—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is not that possibility.'

A second time… A third time, Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks, 'Friends, there is the case where a monk—consummate in virtue, consummate in concentration, consummate in discernment—might enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is the possibility that if he does not gain gnosis in the here & now, then—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—he might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is that possibility.'

A third time, Venerable Udāyin said to Venerable Sāriputta, 'That is impossible, friend Sāriputta. It cannot happen that a monk—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is not that possibility.'

Then the thought occurred to Venerable Sāriputta, 'Even in the presence of the Blessed One, Venerable Udāyin contradicts me up to three times, yet no monk stands up for me. What if I were to be silent?' So he was silent.

Then the Blessed One addressed Venerable Udāyin, 'But what, Udāyin, do you recognize as a mind-made group?'

'Lord, those devas that are formless and made of perception.'

'Udāyin, what's the worth of your speech of an incompetent fool? And yet you conceive yourself as worthy to speak!'

Then the Blessed One addressed Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, do you look on passively when an elder monk is being harassed? Don't you have any compassion for a competent elder monk who's being harassed?'

Then the Blessed One addressed the monks, 'Monks, there is the case where a monk—consummate in virtue, consummate in concentration, consummate in discernment—might enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is the possibility that if he does not gain gnosis in the here & now, then—going beyond companionship with the devas who feed on material food, and arising in a certain mind-made group—he might [there] enter & emerge from the cessation of perception & feeling. There is that possibility.'

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone got up from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then, not long after the Blessed One had left, Venerable Ānanda went to Venerable Upavāna and, on arrival, said to him, 'Just now, friend Upavāna, they were harassing another elder monk, and we didn't question them. It won't be amazing if the Blessed One, arising from his seclusion in the late afternoon, should take this up for a talk and have you speak to it. Right now I've fallen into embarrassment.'

Then the Blessed One, arising from his seclusion in the late afternoon, went to the meeting hall and sat down on a seat laid out. Having sat down, he said to Venerable Upavāna, 'Endowed with how many qualities is an elder monk dear & appealing to his fellows in the holy life, respected & esteemed by them?'

'Endowed with five qualities, lord, an elder monk is dear & appealing to his fellows in the holy life, respected & esteemed by them. Which five?

'There is the case where an elder monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.

'He has heard much, has retained what he has heard, has stored what he has heard. Whatever teachings are admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end, that—in their meaning & expression—proclaim the holy life that is entirely perfect, surpassingly pure: Those he has listened to often, retained, discussed, accumulated, examined with his mind, & well-penetrated in terms of his views.

'He is a fine speaker, with fine delivery, endowed with polite words, distinct, free from phlegm, making the meaning clear.

'He attains—whenever he wants, without strain, without difficulty—the four jhānas that are heightened mental states, pleasant abidings in the here & now.

'He—with the ending of effluents—remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, having directly known & realized them for himself right in the here & now.

'Endowed with these five qualities, lord, an elder monk is dear & appealing to his fellows in the holy life, respected & esteemed by them.'

'Excellent, Upavāna! Excellent! Endowed with these five qualities, an elder monk is dear & appealing to his fellows in the holy life, respected & esteemed by them. If these five qualities are not found in an elder monk, why should his fellows in the holy life honor, respect, revere, & venerate him—for his broken teeth, gray hair, & wrinkled skin? But it's because these five qualities are found in an elder monk that his fellows in the holy life honor, respect, revere, & venerate him.'