SUBJECTS FOR CONTEMPLATION
UPAJJHAṬṬHANA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:57

'There are these five facts that one should reflect on often, whether one is a woman or a man, lay or ordained. Which five?

'I am subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging.' This is the first fact that one should reflect on often.…

'I am subject to illness, have not gone beyond illness'.…

'I am subject to death, have not gone beyond death'.…

'I will grow different, separate from all that is dear & appealing to me'.…

'I am the owner of actions [kamma], heir to actions, born of actions, related through actions, and have actions as my arbitrator. Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir'.…

'These are the five facts that one should reflect on often, whether one is a woman or a man, lay or ordained.

'Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that 'I am subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging'? There are beings who are intoxicated with a (typical) youth's intoxication with youth. Because of that intoxication with youth, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body…in speech…and in mind. But when they often reflect on that fact, that youth's intoxication with youth will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker.…

'Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that 'I am subject to illness, have not gone beyond illness'? There are beings who are intoxicated with a (typical) healthy person's intoxication with health. Because of that intoxication with health, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body…in speech…and in mind. But when they often reflect on that fact, that healthy person's intoxication with health will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker.…

'Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that 'I am subject to death, have not gone beyond death'? There are beings who are intoxicated with a (typical) living person's intoxication with life. Because of that intoxication with life, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body…in speech…and in mind. But when they often reflect on that fact, that living person's intoxication with life will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker.…

'Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that 'I will grow different, separate from all that is dear & appealing to me'? There are beings who feel desire & passion for the things they find dear & appealing. Because of that passion, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body…in speech…and in mind. But when they often reflect on that fact, that desire & passion for the things they find dear & appealing will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker.…

'Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that 'I am the owner of actions, heir to actions, born of actions, related through actions, and have actions as my arbitrator. Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir'? There are beings who conduct themselves in a bad way in body… in speech…and in mind. But when they often reflect on that fact, that bad conduct in body, speech, & mind will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker.…

'Now, a disciple of the noble ones considers this: 'I am not the only one subject to aging, who has not gone beyond aging. To the extent that there are beings—past & future, passing away & re-arising—all beings are subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging.' When he or she often reflects on this, the (factors of the) path take birth. He or she sticks with that path, develops it, cultivates it. As he or she sticks with that path, develops it, & cultivates it, the fetters are abandoned, the obsessions destroyed.

'Further, a disciple of the noble ones considers this: 'I am not the only one subject to illness, who has not gone beyond illness'.… 'I am not the only one subject to death, who has not gone beyond death'.… 'I am not the only one who will grow different, separate from all that is dear & appealing to me'.…

'A disciple of the noble ones considers this: 'I am not the only one who is the owner of actions, heir to actions, born of actions, related through actions, and have actions as my arbitrator; who—whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir. To the extent that there are beings—past & future, passing away & re-arising—all beings are the owners of actions, heir to actions, born of actions, related through actions, and have actions as their arbitrator. Whatever they do, for good or for evil, to that will they fall heir.' When he or she often reflects on this, the (factors of the) path take birth. He or she sticks with that path, develops it, cultivates it. As he or she sticks with that path, develops it, & cultivates it, the fetters are abandoned, the obsessions destroyed.'

'Subject to birth, subject to aging,

subject to death,

run-of-the-mill people

are repelled by those who suffer

from that to which they are subject.

And if I were to be repelled

by beings subject to these things,

it would not be fitting for me,

living as they do.'

As I maintained this attitude—

knowing the Dhamma

without acquisitions—

I overcame all intoxication

with health, youth, & life

as one who sees

renunciation as rest.

For me, energy arose,

unbinding was clearly seen.

There's now no way

I could partake of sensual pleasures.

Having followed the holy life,

I will not return.'