TO BHADDAJI
BHADDAJI SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 5:170

I have heard that on one occasion Venerable Ānanda was staying in Kosambī at Ghosita's monastery. Then Venerable Bhaddaji went to Venerable Ānanda and exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there, Venerable Ānanda said to him, 'What, friend Bhaddaji, is supreme among sights? Supreme among sounds? Supreme among pleasures? Supreme among perceptions? Supreme among states of becoming?'

'There is, friend, the Great Brahmā, the Unconquered Conqueror, the All-Seeing Wielder of Power. Whoever sees that Brahmā, that is supreme among sights.

'There are, friend, the devas called Radiant, who are drenched & overflowing with pleasure. They, from time to time, exclaim, 'O, what pleasure! O, what pleasure.' Whoever hears that sound, that is supreme among sounds.

'There are, friend, the devas called Beautiful Black. They are sensitive to an extremely peaceful & contented pleasure. That is supreme among pleasures.

'There are, friend, the devas who have reached the dimension of nothingness. That is supreme among perceptions.

'There are, friend, the devas who have reached the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. That is supreme among states of becoming.'

'So you agree on this, Bhaddaji, with the great mass of people?'

'Venerable Ānanda is learned. Let the answer occur to him.'

'In that case, friend Bhaddaji, listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, friend,' Venerable Bhaddaji responded to Venerable Ānanda.

Venerable Ānanda said, 'However one has seen immediately prior to the ending of effluents: That is supreme among sights.

'However one has heard immediately prior to the ending of effluents: That is supreme among sounds.

'However one has pleasure immediately prior to the ending of effluents: That is supreme among pleasures.

'However one has a perception immediately prior to the ending of effluents: That is supreme among perceptions.

'However one has become immediately prior to the ending of effluents: That is supreme among states of becoming.'