WITH KHEMA
KHEMA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 6:49

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. And at that time Venerable Khema and Venerable Sumana were staying near Sāvatthī in the Grove of the Blind. Then Venerable Khema and Venerable Sumana went to the Blessed One and on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, Venerable Khema said to the Blessed One, 'When a monk is an arahant, with his effluents ended—one who has reached fulfillment, done the task, laid down the burden, attained the true goal, totally destroyed the fetter of becoming, and is released through right gnosis—the thought doesn't occur to him that 'There is someone better than me,' or 'There is someone equal to me,' or 'There is someone worse than me.' That is what Venerable Khema said, and the Teacher approved. Sensing that 'The Teacher approves of me,' Venerable Khema got up from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed One, circled him—keeping him on his right—and left.

Then Venerable Sumana, not long after Venerable Khema had left, said to the Blessed One, 'When a monk is an arahant, with his effluents ended—one who has reached fulfillment, done the task, laid down the burden, attained the true goal, totally destroyed the fetter of becoming, and is released through right gnosis—the thought doesn't occur to him that 'There is no one better than me,' or 'There is no one equal to me,' or 'There is no one worse than me.' That is what Venerable Sumana said, and the Teacher approved. Sensing that 'The Teacher approves of me,' Venerable Sumana got up from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed One, circled him—keeping him on his right—and left.

Then the Blessed One, not long after Venerable Khema & Venerable Sumana had left, said to the monks, 'Monks, this is how clansmen declare gnosis. The meaning (of gnosis) is stated, but without mention of self. Yet there are some worthless people who declare gnosis as if in jest. They will fall into trouble afterwards.

'Not as higher, lower, nor equal

do they refer to themselves.

With birth ended,

the holy life fulfilled

they go about

totally freed from fetters.'