CUNDA
CUNDA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 6:46

On one occasion Venerable Mahā Cunda was staying among the Cetis in Sañjāti. There he addressed the monks, 'Friend monks!'

'Yes, friend,' the monks responded to him.

Venerable Mahā Cunda said, 'Friends, there is the case where Dhamma-devotee monks [those devoted to memorizing and analyzing the Dhamma] disparage jhāna monks, saying, 'These people are absorbed and besorbed in jhāna, saying, 'We are absorbed, we are absorbed.' But why, indeed, are they absorbed? For what purpose are they absorbed? How are they absorbed?' In that, the Dhamma-devotee monks do not shine brightly, and the jhāna monks do not shine brightly. That is not practicing for the welfare of the masses, for the happiness of the masses, for the good of the masses, nor for the welfare & happiness of devas & human beings.

'And further, there is the case where jhāna monks disparage Dhamma-devotee monks, saying, 'These people say, 'We are Dhamma-devotees, we are Dhamma-devotees,' but they are excitable, boisterous, unsteady, mouthy, loose in their talk, muddled in their mindfulness, unalert, unconcentrated, their minds wandering, their senses uncontrolled. Why, indeed, are they Dhamma devotees? For what purpose are they Dhamma devotees? How are they Dhamma devotees?' In that, the jhāna monks do not shine brightly, and the Dhamma-devotee monks do not shine brightly. That is not practicing for the welfare of the masses, for the happiness of the masses, for the good of the masses, nor for the welfare & happiness of devas & human beings.

'And further, there is the case where Dhamma-devotee monks praise only Dhamma-devotee monks, and not jhāna monks. In that, the Dhamma-devotee monks do not shine brightly, and the jhāna monks do not shine brightly. That is not practicing for the welfare of the masses, for the happiness of the masses, for the good of the masses, nor for the welfare & happiness of devas & human beings.

'And further, there is the case where jhāna monks praise only jhāna monks, and not Dhamma-devotee monks. In that, the jhāna monks do not shine brightly, and the Dhamma-devotee monks do not shine brightly. That is not practicing for the welfare of the masses, for the happiness of the masses, for the good of the masses, nor for the welfare & happiness of devas & human beings.

'Thus, friends, you should train yourselves: 'Being Dhamma-devotee monks, we will speak in praise of jhāna monks.' That's how you should train yourselves. Why is that? Because these are amazing people, hard to find in the world: those who dwell touching the deathless element with the body.

'And thus, friends, you should train yourselves: 'Being jhāna monks, we will speak in praise of Dhamma-devotee monks.' That's how you should train yourselves. Why is that? Because these are amazing people, hard to find in the world: those who penetrate with discernment statements of profound meaning.'