CONDITIONS FOR NO DECLINE AMONG THE MONKS
BHIKKHU-APARIHĀNIYA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 7:21

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha on Vulture Peak Mountain. There he addressed the monks: 'Monks, I will teach you the seven conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said: 'And which seven are the conditions that lead to no decline?

[1] 'As long as the monks meet often, meet a great deal, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

[2] 'As long as the monks meet in harmony, adjourn from their meetings in harmony, and conduct Saṅgha business in harmony, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

[3] 'As long as the monks neither decree what has been undecreed nor repeal what has been decreed, but practice undertaking the training rules as they have been decreed, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

[4] 'As long as the monks honor, respect, venerate, and do homage to the elder monks—those with seniority who have long been ordained, the fathers of the Saṅgha, leaders of the Saṅgha—regarding them as worth listening to, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

[5] 'As long as the monks do not submit to the power of any arisen craving that leads to further becoming, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

[6] 'As long as the monks see their own benefit in wilderness dwellings, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

[7] 'As long as the monks each keep firmly in mind: 'If there are any well-behaved companions in the holy life who have yet to come, may they come; and may the well-behaved companions in the holy life who have come live in comfort,' their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven conditions, and as long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'