TO SĪHA
SĪHA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 7:54

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Vesālī in the Great Forest at the Gabled Pavilion. Then General Sīha went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One: 'Is it possible, lord, to point out a fruit of giving visible in the here & now?'

'Very well then, Sīha, I will cross-question you on this matter. Answer as you see fit. There is the case where there are two men: one without conviction, stingy, miserly, abusive; and one of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support. What do you think? To which of the two would arahants, on feeling sympathy, first show sympathy: to the man without conviction, stingy, miserly, abusive; or to the man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support?'

'Why, lord, would arahants, when feeling sympathy, first show sympathy to the man without conviction, stingy, miserly, abusive? The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support: He's the one to whom arahants, on feeling sympathy, would first show sympathy.'

'What do you think, Sīha? Whom would arahants, when visiting, first visit…?'

'…The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support…'

'What do you think, Sīha? From whom would arahants, when receiving (gifts), first receive (gifts)…?'

'…The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support…'

'What do you think, Sīha? Whom would arahants, when teaching, first teach…?'

'…The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support…'

'What do you think, Sīha? Of whom would a fine reputation spread abroad…?'

'…The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support…'

'What do you think, Sīha? Who would approach any assembly of people—noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or contemplatives—confidently & without embarrassment…?'

'…The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support…'

'What do you think, Sīha? Which of the two would—with the breakup of the body, after death—appear in a good destination, a heavenly world: the man without conviction, stingy, miserly, abusive; or the man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support?'

'Lord, why would the man without conviction, stingy, miserly, abusive—with the breakup of the body, after death—reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world? The man of conviction, a master of giving, one who delights in providing support: He's the one who would—with the breakup of the body, after death—appear in a good destination, a heavenly world.

'Lord, as for the six fruits of giving visible in the here & now that have been pointed out by the Blessed One, it's not the case that I go by conviction in the Blessed One with regard to them. I know them, too. I am one who gives, a master of giving, and arahants, when feeling sympathy, show sympathy to me first. I am one who gives, a master of giving, and arahants, when visiting, visit me first. I am one who gives, a master of giving, and arahants when receiving (gifts), receive (gifts) from me first. I am one who gives, a master of giving, and arahants when teaching, teach me first. I am one who gives, a master of giving, and my fine reputation is spread far & wide: 'Sīha is one who gives, a doer, a supporter of the Saṅgha.' I am one who gives, a master of giving, and when I approach any assembly of people—noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or contemplatives—I do so confidently & without embarrassment.

'But when the Blessed One says to me, 'With the breakup of the body, after death, one who gives, a master of giving, reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world,' that I don't know. That is where I go by conviction in the Blessed One.'

'So it is, Sīha. So it is. With the breakup of the body, after death, one who gives, a master of giving, reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world.'