DESIRE
ICCHĀ SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:61

'Monks, these eight persons are to be found existing in the world. Which eight?

'There is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, yet for him—rousing himself, striving, & making an effort for gain—gain doesn't arise. Because of that lack of gain, he sorrows, grieves, & laments, beats his breast, becomes distraught. This is called a monk who desires gain, who rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, but not gaining it, sorrows & laments. And he has fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, and for him—rousing himself, striving, & making an effort for gain—gain arises. Because of that gain, he becomes intoxicated, complacent, & falls into heedlessness. This is called a monk who desires gain, who rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, and on gaining it becomes intoxicated & heedless. And he has fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, and for him—not rousing himself, striving, or making an effort for gain—gain doesn't arise. Because of that lack of gain, he sorrows, grieves, & laments, beats his breast, becomes distraught. This is called a monk who desires gain, who doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, and not gaining it, sorrows & laments. And he has fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, yet for him—not rousing himself, striving, or making an effort for gain—gain arises. Because of that gain, he becomes intoxicated, complacent, & falls into heedlessness. This is called a monk who desires gain, who doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, but on gaining it becomes intoxicated & heedless. And he has fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, yet for him—rousing himself, striving, & making an effort for gain—gain doesn't arise. Because of that lack of gain, he doesn't sorrow, grieve, lament, beat his breast, or become distraught. This is called a monk who desires gain, who rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, but not gaining it, doesn't sorrow or lament. And he has not fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, and for him—rousing himself, striving, & making an effort for gain—gain arises. Because of that gain, he doesn't become intoxicated, complacent, or fall into heedlessness. This is called a monk who desires gain, who rouses himself, strives, & makes an effort for gain, and on gaining it doesn't become intoxicated or heedless. And he has not fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, and for him—not rousing himself, striving, or making an effort for gain—gain doesn't arise. Because of that lack of gain, he doesn't sorrow, grieve, lament, beat his breast, or become distraught. This is called a monk who desires gain, who doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, and not gaining it, doesn't sorrow or lament. And he not has fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Then there is the case where a desire for gain arises in a monk living independently in seclusion. He doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, yet for him—not rousing himself, striving, or making an effort for gain—gain arises. Because of that gain, he doesn't become intoxicated, complacent, or fall into heedlessness. This is called a monk who desires gain, who doesn't rouse himself, strive, or make an effort for gain, and on gaining it doesn't become intoxicated or heedless. And he has not fallen away from the True Dhamma.

'Monks, these eight persons are to be found existing in the world.'