TO GOTAMĪ
GOTAMĪ SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 8:51

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Park. Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed to him, stood to one side. As she was standing there she said to him: 'It would be good, lord, if women might obtain the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

'Enough, Gotamī. Don't advocate women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

A second time.… A third time she said to him: 'It would be good, lord, if women might obtain the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

'Enough, Gotamī. Don't advocate women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

So Mahāpajāpati Gotamī, (thinking,) 'The Blessed One does not allow women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata'—sad & unhappy, crying, her face in tears—bowed to the Blessed One and left, keeping him to her right.

The Blessed One, having stayed as long as he liked in Kapilavatthu, set out for Vesālī. After wandering in stages, he arrived at Vesālī. There he stayed near Vesālī at the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest.

Then Mahāpajāpati Gotamī, having had her hair cut off, having donned ochre robes, set out for Vesālī together with a large number of Sakyan women. After wandering in stages, she arrived at Vesālī and went to the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest. Then she stood there outside the porch, her feet swollen, her limbs covered with dust, sad & unhappy, crying, her face in tears. Venerable Ānanda saw her standing there outside the porch, her feet swollen, her limbs covered with dust, sad & unhappy, crying, her face in tears, and so asked her, 'Why, Gotamī, why are you standing here outside the porch, your feet swollen, your limbs covered with dust, sad & unhappy, crying, your face in tears?'

'Because, venerable sir, the Blessed One does not allow women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

'In that case, Gotamī, stay right here while I ask the Blessed One to allow women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

Then Venerable Ānanda went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One: 'Lord, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī is standing outside the porch—her feet swollen, her limbs covered with dust, sad and unhappy, crying, her face in tears, because the Blessed One does not allow women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata. It would be good if women might obtain the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

'Enough, Ānanda. Don't advocate women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

A second time.… A third time, Venerable Ānanda said, '… It would be good, lord, if women might obtain the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

'Enough, Ānanda. Don't advocate women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

Then the thought occurred to Venerable Ānanda, 'The Blessed One does not allow women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata. What if I were to find some other way to ask the Blessed One to allow women's Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.' So he said to the Blessed One, 'Lord, if a woman were to go forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata, would she be able to realize the fruit of stream-entry, once-returning, non-returning, or arahantship?'

'Yes, Ānanda, she would.…'

'In that case, lord, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī has been of great service to the Blessed One. She was the Blessed One's aunt, foster mother, nurse, giver of milk. When the Blessed One's mother passed away, she gave him milk. It would be good if women might obtain the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata.'

'Ānanda, if Mahāpajāpati Gotamī accepts eight rules of respect [garu-dhamma], that will be her Acceptance [as a nun].

[1] 'A nun who has been fully accepted even for a century must bow down, rise up from her seat, salute with hands palm-to-palm over her heart, and perform forms of respect due to superiors to a monk even if he has been fully accepted on that very day. This rule is to be honored, respected, revered, venerated, never to be transgressed as long as she lives.

[2] 'A nun must not spend the Rains in a residence where there is no monk (nearby).…

[3] 'Every half-month a nun should expect two things from the Saṅgha of monks: (permission to) ask for the date of the uposatha and (permission to) approach for an exhortation.…

[4] 'At the end of the Rains-residence, a nun should invite (accusations from) both Saṅghas [the Saṅgha of monks and the Saṅgha of nuns] on any of three grounds: what they have seen, what they have heard, what they have suspected.…

[5] 'A nun who has broken any of the rules of respect must undergo penance for half a month under both Saṅghas.…

[6] 'Only after a female trainee has trained in the six precepts for two years can she request Acceptance from both Saṅghas.…

[7] 'A monk must not in any way be insulted or reviled by a nun.…

[8] 'From this day forward, the admonition of a monk by a nun is forbidden, but the admonition of a nun by a monk is not forbidden. This rule, too, is to be honored, respected, revered, venerated, never to be transgressed as long as she lives.

'If Mahāpajāpati Gotamī accepts these eight rules of respect, that will be her Acceptance.'

Then Venerable Ānanda, having learned the eight rules of respect in the Blessed One's presence, went to Mahāpajāpati Gotamī and, on arrival, said to her, 'Gotamī, if you accept these eight rules of respect, that will be your Acceptance. [And he repeated the eight rules.]'

'Venerable Ānanda, just as if a young woman—or man—fond of ornamentation, with bathed head, having been given a garland of lotuses or jasmine or scented creepers, having accepted it in both hands, were to place it on her head, in the same way I accept the eight rules of respect, never to transgress them as long as I live.'

Then Venerable Ānanda returned to the Blessed One and, having bowed down, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said, 'Venerable sir, Mahāpajāpati Gotamī has accepted the eight rules of respect, never to transgress them as long as she lives.'

'But, Ānanda, if women had not obtained the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata, the holy life would have lasted long, the true Dhamma would have lasted 1,000 years. But now that they have obtained the Going-forth from the home life into homelessness in the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the Tathāgata, the holy life will not last long, the true Dhamma will last only 500 years.

'Just as a clan in which there are many women and few men is easily plundered by robbers and thieves, in the same way, in whatever Dhamma & Vinaya women obtain the Going-forth from home life into homelessness, the holy life does not last long.

'Just as, when the white blight falls on a field of ripening wheat, that field of wheat does not last long, in the same way, in whatever Dhamma & Vinaya women obtain the Going-forth from home life into homelessness, the holy life does not last long.

'Just as, when the rust disease falls on a field of sugar cane, that field of sugar cane does not last long, in the same way, in whatever Dhamma & Vinaya women obtain the Going-forth from home life into homelessness, the holy life does not last long.

'Just as a man might make an embankment in advance around a great reservoir to keep the waters from overflowing, in the same way I have set forth in advance the eight rules of respect for nuns that they are not to transgress as long as they live.'