WITH ĀNANDA
ĀNANDA SUTTA  Aṅguttara Nikāya 9:37

On one occasion Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī at Ghosita's monastery. There he addressed the monks, 'Friend monks!'

'Yes, friend,' the monks responded to him.

Venerable Ānanda said, 'It's amazing, friends, it's astounding, how the Blessed One who knows & sees, the worthy one, rightly self-awakened, has attained & awakened to an opening [in a confining place] for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow & lamentation, for the disappearance of pain & distress, for the attainment of the right method, & for the realization of unbinding, where the eye will be, and those forms, and yet one will not be sensitive to that dimension; where the ear will be, and those sounds… where the nose will be, and those aromas… where the tongue will be, and those flavors… where the body will be, and those tactile sensations, and yet one will not be sensitive to that dimension.'

When this was said, Venerable Udāyin said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Is one percipient when not sensitive to that dimension, my friend, or unpercipient?'

[Venerable Ānanda:] 'One is percipient when not sensitive to that dimension, my friend, not unpercipient.'

[Venerable Udāyin:] 'When not sensitive to that dimension, my friend, one is percipient of what?'

[Venerable Ānanda:] 'There is the case where, with the complete transcending of perceptions of (physical) form, with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, and not attending to perceptions of multiplicity, (perceiving,) 'Infinite space,' one enters & remains in the dimension of the infinitude of space. Percipient in this way, one is not sensitive to that dimension [i.e, the dimensions of the five physical senses].

'And further, with the complete transcending of the dimension of the infinitude of space, (perceiving,) 'Infinite consciousness,' one enters & remains in the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness. Percipient in this way, too, one is not sensitive to that dimension.

'And further, with the complete transcending of the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness, (perceiving,) 'There is nothing,' one enters & remains in the dimension of nothingness. Percipient in this way, too, one is not sensitive to that dimension.

'Once, friend, when I was staying near Sāketa at the Game Refuge in the Black Forest, the nun Jaṭila Bhāgikā went to where I was staying, and on arrival—having bowed to me—stood to one side. As she was standing there, she said to me: 'The concentration whereby—neither pressed down nor forced back, nor with fabrication kept blocked or suppressed—still as a result of release, contented as a result of standing still, and as a result of contentment one is not agitated: This concentration is said by the Blessed One to be the fruit of what?'

'I said to her, 'Sister, the concentration whereby—neither pressed down nor forced back, nor kept in place by the fabrications of forceful restraint—still as a result of release, contented as a result of standing still, and as a result of contentment one is not agitated: This concentration is said by the Blessed One to be the fruit of gnosis [arahantship].' Percipient in this way, too, one is not sensitive to that dimension.'