2:14  DHAMMIKA

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Dhammika the lay follower, together with 500 other lay followers, approached the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he addressed the Blessed One in verses:

'I ask you, Gotama, Deeply Discerning:

How-acting does one become a good disciple—

either one gone from home into homelessness,

or a lay follower with a home?

For you discern the destination & future course

of the world along with its devas

—there is no one equal to you

in seeing the subtle goal;

for they call you foremost, awakened.

Understanding all knowledge

the whole Dhamma,

you proclaim it to beings with sympathetic mind.

Your roof opened up, All-around Eye,

you, stainless, illumine the whole world.

He came to your presence—

Erāvaṇa, the nāga king,

having heard, 'Conqueror.'

Having consulted with you, having heard,

he understood and, satisfied,

(thought,) 'Good.'

And King Vessavaṇa Kuvera

came, inquiring about the Dhamma.

To him, too, you spoke when asked.

And he too, having heard, was satisfied.

And these sectarians, debaters by habit,

whether Ājīvakas or Nigaṇṭhas,

don't overtake you in terms of discernment,

as a person standing

doesn't catch up

with one going quickly.

And these brahmans, debaters by habit,

any elderly brahmans,

and any others who consider themselves debaters,

all depend on you for the meaning.

For this Dhamma is subtle & blissful.

This, Blessed One, well set-forth by you:

We all want to hear it.

Tell it to us, Excellent Awakened, when asked.

All these monks are sitting together—

and the lay followers, right there—to hear.

Let them listen to the Dhamma

awakened to by one who is stainless,

as the devas listen to Vasavant's well-spoken word.'

The Buddha:

'Listen to me, monks. I will let you hear

the Dhamma of polishing away. Live by it, all of you.

May those who are thoughtful, seeing the purpose,

partake of the duties proper for one gone forth.

A monk should surely not wander

at the wrong time.

He should go for alms in the village

at the right time.

For attachments get attached to one going

at the wrong time.

That's why they don't wander at the wrong time,

the awakened.

Sights, sounds, tastes,

smells, & tactile sensations

intoxicate beings.

Subduing desire for these things,

one should, at the right time, enter for alms.

Having received alms in proper season,

a monk, returning alone, should sit down in solitude.

Pondering what's inside, his mind-state collected,

he should not let his heart wander outside.

If he should converse with a disciple,

a monk, or anyone else,

he should utter the exquisite Dhamma,

and not divisive speech or disparagement of others.

For some retaliate against arguments.

We don't praise those of limited discernment.

Attachments get attached on account of this & that,

for they send their minds far away from there.

Having heard the Dhamma taught by the One Well-Gone,

the disciple of foremost discernment, having considered it,

should resort to almsfood, a dwelling, a place to sit & lie down,

and water for washing dust from his robe.

So a monk should stay unsmeared by these things—

almsfood, a dwelling, a place to sit & lie down,

and water for washing dust from his robe—

like a water-drop on a lotus.

As for the householder protocol,

I will tell you how-acting

one becomes a good disciple,

since the entire monk-practice

can't be managed by those wealthy in property.

Laying aside violence toward all living creatures,

both the firm & unfirm in the world,

one should not kill a living being, nor have it killed,

nor condone killing by others.

Then the disciple should avoid

consciously (taking) what's not given,

—anything, anywhere—

should not have it taken

nor condone its taking.

He should avoid all (taking of) what's not given.

The observant person should avoid uncelibate behavior

like a pit of glowing embers.

But if he's incapable of celibate behavior,

he should not transgress with the wife of another.

When gone to an audience hall or assembly,

or one-on-one, he should not tell a lie,

nor have it told, nor condone it's being told.

He should avoid every untruth.

Any householder who approves of this Dhamma

should not take intoxicating drink,

nor have others drink it, nor condone its being drunk,

knowing that it ends in madness.

For from intoxication, fools do evil things

and get others, heedless, to do them.

One should avoid this opening to demerit—

madness, delusion—appealing to fools.

One should not kill a living being,

take what's not given, tell a lie, nor be a drinker.

One should abstain from uncelibate behavior—

sexual intercourse—should not eat at night,

a meal at the wrong time,

should not wear a garland or use scents,

should sleep on a bed, on the ground, or on a mat,

For this, they say, is the eightfold uposatha,

proclaimed by the Awakened One

who has gone to the end of suffering & stress.

Then, having kept, well-accomplished,

the eightfold uposatha

on the fourteenth, fifteenth, & eighth

of the fortnight,

and on special days of the fortnight,

with clear & confident mind,

the observant person

at dawn after the uposatha,

confident, rejoicing,

should share food & drink, as is proper,

with the Saṅgha of monks.

One should righteously support mother & father,

should engage in righteous trade,

One heedful in this householder protocol

goes to the devas called

Self-radiant.'