3:4  SUNDARIKA BHĀRADVĀJA

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the Kosalans on the bank of the River Sundarika. And on that occasion, the brahman Sundarika Bhāradvāja was offering a fire sacrifice and performing a fire oblation on the bank of the River Sundarika. Then, having offered the fire sacrifice and performed the fire oblation, he got up from his seat and looked around to the four directions, (thinking,) 'Who should eat the remains of the offering?' He saw the Blessed One sitting not far away at the root of a tree with his head covered. On seeing him, he took the remains of the offering in his left hand and his water-pot in his right, and went to the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One, at the sound of the brahman Sundarika Bhāradvāja's footsteps, uncovered his head. The brahman Sundarika Bhāradvāja (thinking,) 'This venerable one is shaven. This venerable one is a shaveling,' wanted to turn back. But then the thought occurred to him, 'Still, there are some brahmans who are shaven. What if, having approached him, I were to ask his caste?'

So he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, asked: 'What is the venerable one's birth-caste?'

Then the Blessed One addressed the brahman Sundarika Bhāradvāja in verse:

'I'm not a brahman or king's son,

not a merchant, or anyone at all.

Comprehending the clan

of the run-of-the-mill,

having nothing,

I wander by means of wisdom

in the world.

Wearing my outer robe,

I wander without home,

my hair     shaven off,

my mind          entirely unbound,

not adhering to people here.

You ask me

an inappropriate question

about clan.'

Sundarika:

'But, sir, brahmans surely inquire of brahmans,

'Are you among the brahmans?'

The Buddha:

'If you say you're a brahman

and I'm not a brahman,

I ask you the three lines of the Sāvitti

and its twenty-four syllables.'

Sundarika:

'Because of what

did seers, men, noble warriors, & brahmans

—many of them here in the world—

(first) arrange sacrifices to devas?'

The Buddha:

'Whoever has attained the end,

an attainer-of-knowledge,

should receive an oblation

at the time of a sacrifice,

his (sacrifice), I say, would succeed.'

Sundarika:

'So yes, our sacrifice will succeed

for we have seen an attainer-of-knowledge like you.

It's from not seeing those like you

that someone else eats the sacrificial cake.'

The Buddha:

'Therefore, brahman,

as you are seeking your benefit,

approach and ask.

Perhaps you may find here

one at peace, with no anger,

no desire, no affliction:

one with good wisdom.'

Sundarika:

'I delight in sacrifice,

I desire to sacrifice,

but I don't understand

where a sacrifice succeeds.

Teach me, sir. Tell me that.'

The Buddha:

'In that case, brahman, lend ear.

I will teach you the Dhamma.

Don't inquire about birth.

Inquire about conduct.

As from wood, a fire is born,

so a sage, even from lowly birth

—steadfast, restrained

through a sense of shame—

becomes a thoroughbred.

One tamed by truth,

endowed with self-control,

attained to the end of knowledge,

having fulfilled the holy life:

To him, at the right time,

you should bestow an offering,

to him a brahman aiming at merit

should sacrifice.

Those with well-restrained minds,

straight as a shuttle:

To them, at the right time,

you should bestow an offering,

to them a brahman aiming at merit

should sacrifice.

Those devoid of passion,

their faculties well-centered,

released like the moon

from the grasp of an eclipse:

To them, at the right time,

you should bestow an offering,

to them a brahman aiming at merit

should sacrifice.

Unattached, they wander in the world,

always mindful,

abandoning possessiveness:

To them, at the right time,

you should bestow an offering,

to them a brahman aiming at merit

should sacrifice.

Who, abandoning sensuality,

wanders victorious,

who knows the end

of birth & death,

totally unbound, cool

as a pool of water:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Consonant among the consonant,

far from the discordant,

the Tathāgata of infinite discernment,

not smeared here or beyond:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

In whom no deceptiveness dwells,

no conceit,

devoid of greed, un-

possessive, un-

desiring,

his anger dispelled,

his mind entirely unbound,

a brahman who has abandoned

the stain of grief:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

He has abandoned the homes of the mind,

has

no possessions at all,

no clinging here or beyond:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Centered, he's crossed

over the flood,

he knows the Dhamma

through the highest view,

effluents ended, bearing his last body:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Whose effluent of becoming

and harsh speech

are destroyed, finished, do not exist—

he, an attainer-of-knowledge,

everywhere totally released:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Gone beyond snares,

for whom there are no snares,

who, among those attached to conceit,

is unattached to conceit,

comprehending stress

along with its field & its site:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Independent of desire,

seeing seclusion,

gone beyond the views known by others,

who has

no supports

no mental objects

at all:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

In whom, having understood them,

phenomena from high to low

are destroyed, finished, do not exist—

at peace, released in the ending of clinging:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Seeing the end & ending

of fetters & birth,

having dispelled the path of passion

without trace,

pure, faultless, stainless, clear:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Who doesn't contemplate

self by means of self,

centered, straightened,

steadfast in mind,

truly unperturbed,

free from rigidity, free

from doubt:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.

Who has no conditions for delusion,

with knowledge & vision of all phenomena

he carries his last body,

having attained the unexcelled

self-awakening, auspicious—

to that extent is the purity of a spirit:

The Tathāgata deserves

the sacrificial cake.'

Sundarika:

'And may my offering

be a true offering

from having obtained

an attainer-of-knowledge like you.

As Brahmā is my witness,

may the Blessed One accept,

may the Blessed One eat,

my sacrificial cake.'

The Buddha:

'What's been chanted over with verses

shouldn't be eaten by me.

That's not the nature, brahman,

of one who's seen rightly.

What's been chanted over with verses

Awakened Ones reject.

That being their Dhamma, brahman,

this is their way of life.

Serve with other food & drink

a fully-perfected great seer,

his effluents     ended,

his anxiety     stilled,

for that is the field

for one looking for merit.'

Sundarika:

'It's well, Blessed One, how I understand

who should eat the offering of one like me,

whom I should seek at the time of sacrifice

having received your advice.'

The Buddha:

'Whose violence is fully gone,

whose mind is     limpid,

whose sloth is     dispelled

—fully released from sensuality—

one who has subdued boundaries,

a master of birth & death,

a sage consummate in sagacity:

When one like this has come to the sacrifice,

then, subduing scorn, with hands palm-to-palm

over the heart,

do homage.

Worship him with food & drink.

In this way the offerings will succeed.'

Sundarika:

'Master, the Awakened One,

field of merit

unexcelled          in all the world,

recipient          for all the world

deserves          the sacrificial cake.

A gift given to you, master,

bears great fruit.

Then the brahman Sundarika Bhāradvāja said to the Blessed One, 'Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear. I go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the Saṅgha of monks. Let me obtain the Going-forth in Master Gotama's presence, let me obtain Acceptance (into the Bhikkhu Saṅgha).'

Then the brahman Sundarika Bhāradvāja obtained the Going-forth in the Blessed One's presence, he obtained Acceptance. And not long after his Acceptance—dwelling alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, & resolute—he in no long time reached & remained in the supreme goal of the holy life, for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing & realizing it for himself in the here-&-now. He knew: 'Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world.' And so Venerable Sundarika Bhāradvāja became another one of the arahants.