THE GREAT TOTAL UNBINDING DISCOURSE Section 1
MAHĀ PARINIBBĀNA SUTTA  Dīgha Nikāya 16

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha on Vulture Peak Mountain. And on that occasion, Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the king of Magadha, wanted to attack the Vajjians. He said: 'I will cut down these Vajjians—so mighty, so powerful! I will destroy these Vajjians! I will bring these Vajjians to ruin—these Vajjians!'

Then he addressed Vassakāra the brahman, the chief minister of Magadha: 'Come, brahman. Go to the Blessed One and, on arrival, show reverence with your head to his feet in my name and ask whether he is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, & living in comfort, (saying,) 'Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the king of Magadha, lord, shows reverence with his head to the Blessed One's feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong, & living in comfort.' And then say: 'Lord, Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the king of Magadha, wants to attack the Vajjians. He says: 'I will cut down these Vajjians—so mighty, so powerful! I will destroy these Vajjians! I will bring these Vajjians to ruin—these Vajjians!' However the Blessed One answers, having grasped it well, report to me. For Tathāgatas do not speak untruthfully.'

Responding, 'As you say, sire,' to Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the King of Magadha, Vassakāra the brahman, the chief minister of Magadha, had auspicious vehicles yoked, got into an auspicious vehicle, left Rājagaha with the auspicious vehicles and drove toward Vulture Peak Mountain. Going in his vehicle as far as there was ground for a vehicle, getting down from his vehicle, he approached the Blessed One on foot. On arrival, he exchanged courteous greetings with the Blessed One. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he told the Blessed One, 'Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the king of Magadha, Master Gotama, shows reverence with his head to Master Gotama's feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong, & living in comfort. Master Gotama, Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the king of Magadha, wants to attack the Vajjians. He says: 'I will cut down these Vajjians—so mighty, so powerful! I will destroy these Vajjians! I will bring these Vajjians to ruin—these Vajjians!'

Now on that occasion Venerable Ānanda was standing behind the Blessed One, fanning him. So the Blessed One addressed Venerable Ānanda, 'Have you heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjians meet often and meet a great deal?'

'I have heard, lord, that the Vajjians meet often and meet a great deal.'

'As long as the Vajjians meet often and meet a great deal, Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'Have you heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjians meet in harmony, adjourn from their meetings in harmony, and conduct their Vajjian business in harmony?'

'I have heard that, lord.…

'As long as the Vajjians meet in harmony, adjourn from their meetings in harmony, and conduct their Vajjian business in harmony, Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'Have you heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjians neither decree what has been undecreed nor repeal what has been decreed, but conduct themselves, having undertaken the ancient Vajjian laws as they have been decreed?'

'I have heard that, lord.…

'As long as the Vajjians neither decree what has been undecreed nor repeal what has been decreed, but conduct themselves, having undertaken the ancient Vajjian laws as they have been decreed, Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'Have you heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjians honor, respect, venerate, and do homage to the Vajjian elders of the Vajjis, regarding them as worth listening to?'

'I have heard that, lord.…

'As long as the Vajjians honor, respect, venerate, and do homage to the Vajjian elders of the Vajjis, regarding them as worth listening to, Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'Have you heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjians do not roughly drag off women & girls of good families and take them captive?'

'I have heard that, lord.…

'As long as the Vajjians do not roughly drag off women & girls of good families and take them captive, Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'Have you heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjians honor, respect, venerate, and do homage to the Vajjian shrines, both inside (the city) and out, and that they do not let the righteous offerings done in the past and given in the past to those shrines fall into decline?'

'I have heard that, lord.…

'As long as the Vajjians honor, respect, venerate, and do homage to the Vajjian shrines, both inside (the city) and out, and do not let the righteous offerings done in the past and given in the past to those shrines fall into decline, Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'Have you heard, Ānanda, that righteous protection, watch, and guarding for arahants is well-provided by the Vajjians (with the thought,) 'If there are any arahants who have yet to come to our domain, may they come; and may the arahants who have come to our domain live in comfort'?

'I have heard that, lord.…

'As long as righteous protection, watch, and guarding for arahants is well-provided by the Vajjians (with the thought,) 'If there are any arahants who have yet to come to our domain, may they come; and may the arahants who have come to our domain live in comfort,' Ānanda, their growth can be expected, not their decline.'

Then the Blessed One addressed Vassakāra the brahman, the chief minister of Magadha, 'Once, brahman, I was staying near Vesālī at the Sārandada shrine. There I taught the Vajjians these seven conditions that lead to no decline. As long as these seven conditions endure among the Vajjians, and as long as the Vajjians remain steadfast in these seven conditions, the Vajjians' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

When this was said, Vassakāra the brahman, the chief minister of Magadha, said to the Blessed One, 'Master Gotama, even if the Vajjians are endowed with only one of these conditions that lead to no decline, the Vajjians' growth can be expected, not their decline—to say nothing of all seven. Nothing can be done to the Vajjians by King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, the king of Magadha, through force of arms—except by befriending them and sowing dissension (among them).

'Well, then, Master Gotama, we must go now. Many are our duties, many our responsibilities.'

'Then do, brahman, what you think it is now time to do.'

Then Vassakāra the brahman, the chief minister of Magadha, delighting in and approving of the Blessed One's words, got up from his seat and left.

Not long after his departure, the Blessed One addressed Venerable Ānanda: 'Go, Ānanda. Have all the monks living in dependence on Rājagaha gather at the assembly hall.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Venerable Ānanda—having had all the monks living in dependence on Rājagaha gather at the assembly hall—approached the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to him, he stood to one side. As he was standing there, he said to the Blessed One, 'The Saṅgha of monks has gathered, lord. May the Blessed One do what he thinks it is now time to do.'

Then the Blessed One, getting up from his seat, went to the assembly hall and, on arrival, sat down on the seat laid out. Having sat down, he addressed the monks:

'Monks, I will teach you the seven conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said:

'Monks, as long as the monks meet often, meet a great deal, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks meet in harmony, adjourn from their meetings in harmony, and conduct Saṅgha business in harmony, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks neither decree what has been undecreed nor repeal what has been decreed, but conduct themselves, having undertaken the training rules as they have been decreed, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks honor, respect, venerate, and do homage to the elder monks—those with seniority who have long been ordained, the fathers of the Saṅgha, leaders of the Saṅgha—regarding them as worth listening to, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks do not come under the sway of any arisen craving that leads to further-becoming, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks see their own benefit in wilderness dwellings, their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'And as long as the monks each keep firmly in mind: 'If there are any well-behaved companions in the holy life who have yet to come, may they come; and may the well-behaved companions in the holy life who have come live in comfort,' their growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, and as long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven conditions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

'Monks, I will teach you seven further conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said:

'Monks, as long as the monks are not infatuated with (construction) work, do not delight in construction work, and are not committed to infatuation with construction work, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks are not infatuated with gossip…

'As long as the monks are not infatuated with sleeping…

'As long as the monks are not infatuated with entanglement…

'As long as the monks are not infatuated with evil ambition and have not come under the sway of evil ambitions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks do not have evil friends, evil companions, and evil comrades, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'And as long as the monks do not stop half-way with lower distinctions & achievements, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, and as long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven conditions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

'Monks, I will teach you seven further conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said: 'Monks, as long as the monks have conviction… shame… compunction… learning… aroused persistence… established mindfulness… discernment, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, and as long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven conditions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

'Monks, I will teach you seven further conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said:

'Monks, as long as the monks develop mindfulness as a factor for awakening… analysis of qualities as a factor for awakening… persistence as a factor for awakening… rapture as a factor for awakening… calm as a factor for awakening… concentration as a factor for awakening… equanimity as a factor for awakening, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, and as long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven conditions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

'Monks, I will teach you seven further conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said: 'Monks, as long as the monks develop the perception of inconstancy… the perception of not-self… the perception of unattractiveness… the perception of drawbacks… the perception of abandoning… the perception of dispassion… the perception of cessation, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, and as long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven conditions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

'Monks, I will teach you six further conditions that lead to no decline. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said:

'As long as the monks are set on bodily acts of good will with regard to their companions in the holy life, to their faces & behind their backs, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as the monks are set on verbal acts of good will with regard to their companions in the holy life, to their faces & behind their backs…

'As long as the monks are set on mental acts of good will with regard to their companions in the holy life, to their faces & behind their backs…

'As long as the monks, whatever righteous gains they may obtain in a righteous way—even if only the alms in their bowls—do not consume them alone, but consume them after sharing them in common with their virtuous companions in the holy life…

'As long as the monks—with reference to the virtues that are untorn, unbroken, unspotted, unsplattered, liberating, praised by the observant, ungrasped at, leading to concentration—dwell with their virtue in tune with that of their companions in the holy life, to their faces & behind their backs…

'And as long as the monks—with reference to the view that is noble, leading outward, that leads those who act in accordance with it to the right ending of suffering & stress—dwell with their view in tune with those of their companions in the holy life, to their faces & behind their backs, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.

'As long as these six conditions endure among the monks, and as long as the monks remain steadfast in these six conditions, the monks' growth can be expected, not their decline.'

While staying there near Rājagaha on Vulture Peak Mountain, the Blessed One often gave this Dhamma talk to the monks: 'Such is virtue, such is concentration, such is discernment. Concentration nurtured with virtue is of great fruit, great reward. Discernment nurtured with concentration is of great fruit, great reward. The mind nurtured with discernment is rightly released from the effluents, i e, the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance.'

Then the Blessed One, having stayed near Rājagaha as long as he pleased, said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Come, Ānanda, we will head for Ambalaṭṭhikā.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, together with a large Saṅgha of monks, went to Ambalaṭṭhikā. There he stayed near Ambalaṭṭhikā at the Royal Cottage. While staying there near Ambalaṭṭhikā at the Royal Cottage, the Blessed One often gave this Dhamma talk to the monks: 'Such is virtue, such is concentration, such is discernment. Concentration nurtured with virtue is of great fruit, great reward. Discernment nurtured with concentration is of great fruit, great reward. The mind nurtured with discernment is rightly released from the effluents, i e, the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance.'

Then the Blessed One, having stayed near Ambalaṭṭhikā as long as he pleased, said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Come, Ānanda, we will head for Nālandā.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, together with a large Saṅgha of monks, went to Nālandā. There he stayed near Nālandā at the Pāvādika mango grove.

Then Venerable Sāriputta went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Blessed One, 'Lord, I have confidence in the Blessed One that there neither has been nor will be nor is currently found a contemplative or brahman whose direct knowledge of self-awakening is greater than that of the Blessed One!'

'Grand is this bull-statement you have spoken, Sāriputta; categorical this lion's roar you have roared: 'Lord, I have confidence in the Blessed One that there neither has been nor will be nor is currently found a contemplative or brahman whose direct knowledge of self-awakening is greater than that of the Blessed One!' So then, Sāriputta, have you encompassed with your awareness the awareness of all the worthy ones, the rightly self-awakened ones that have been in the past and known: 'Such was their virtue, such their Dhamma, such their discernment, such their (meditative) dwelling, such their release'?'

'No, lord.'

'Then have you encompassed with your awareness the awareness of all the worthy ones, the rightly self-awakened ones that will be in the future and known: 'Such will be their virtue, such their Dhamma, such their discernment, such their (meditative) dwelling, such their release'?'

'No, lord.'

'Then have you encompassed with your awareness my awareness—the awareness of the worthy one, the rightly self-awakened one in the present—and known: 'Such is his virtue, such his Dhamma, such his discernment, such his (meditative) dwelling, such his release'?'

'No, lord.'

'Then, Sāriputta, if you don't have knowledge of the awareness of the worthy ones, the rightly self-awakened ones of the past, future, & present, how is it that just now you spoke this grand bull-statement and roared this categorical lion's roar: 'Lord, I have confidence in the Blessed One that there neither has been nor will be nor is currently found a contemplative or brahman whose direct knowledge of self-awakening is greater than that of the Blessed One'?'

'Lord, I don't have knowledge of the awareness of the worthy ones, the rightly self-awakened ones of the past, future, & present, but I have known the consistency of the Dhamma. It's as if there were a royal frontier city with strong ramparts, strong walls & arches, and a single gate. In it would be a wise, competent, & intelligent gatekeeper to keep out those he didn't know and to let in those he did. Walking along the path encircling the city, he wouldn't see a crack or an opening in the walls big enough for even a cat to slip through. The thought would occur to him: 'Whatever large creatures enter or leave the city all enter or leave it through this gate.'

'In the same way, I have known the consistency of the Dhamma: 'All those who were worthy ones, the rightly self-awakened ones in the past awoke to the unexcelled right self-awakening after having abandoned the five hindrances—those defilements of awareness that weaken discernment—having well-established their minds in the four establishings of mindfulness and having developed, as they have come to be, the seven factors for awakening. All those who will be worthy ones, the rightly self-awakened ones in the future will awaken to the unexcelled right self-awakening after having abandoned the five hindrances—those defilements of awareness that weaken discernment—having well-established their minds in the four establishings of mindfulness and having developed, as they have come to be, the seven factors for awakening. The Blessed One who is now the worthy one, the rightly self-awakened one has awakened to the unexcelled right self-awakening after having abandoned the five hindrances—those defilements of awareness that weaken discernment—having well-established his mind in the four establishings of mindfulness and having developed, as they have come to be, the seven factors for awakening.'

While staying there near Nālandā at the Pāvādika mango grove, the Blessed One often gave this Dhamma talk to the monks: 'Such is virtue, such is concentration, such is discernment. Concentration nurtured with virtue is of great fruit, great reward. Discernment nurtured with concentration is of great fruit, great reward. The mind nurtured with discernment is rightly released from the effluents, i e, the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance.'

Then the Blessed One, having stayed near Nālandā as long as he pleased, said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Come, Ānanda, we will head for Pāṭali Village.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, together with a large Saṅgha of monks, went to Pāṭali Village. The lay followers of Pāṭali Village heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has reached Pāṭali Village.' So they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to him, 'Lord, may the Blessed One acquiesce to (the use of) the rest-house hall.'

The Blessed One acquiesced with silence. Sensing his acquiescence, the lay followers of Pāṭali Village got up from their seats and, bowing down to him and circumambulating him, went to the rest-house hall. On arrival, they spread it all over with felt rugs, arranged seats, set out a water vessel, and raised an oil lamp. Then they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, stood to one side. As they were standing there, they said to him, 'Lord, the rest-house hall has been covered all over with felt rugs, seats have been arranged, a water vessel has been set out, and an oil lamp raised. May the Blessed One do what he thinks it is now time to do.'

So the Blessed One, in the evening, after adjusting his lower robe and taking his bowl & outer robe, went together with the Saṅgha of monks to the rest-house hall. On arrival he washed his feet, entered the hall, and sat with his back to the central post, facing east. The Saṅgha of monks washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat with their backs to the western wall, facing east, ranged around the Blessed One.

The lay followers of Pāṭali Village washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat with their backs to the eastern wall, facing west, ranged around the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One addressed the lay followers of Pāṭali Village, 'Householders, there are these five drawbacks coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue. Which five?

'There is the case where an unvirtuous person, defective in virtue, by reason of heedlessness undergoes the loss or confiscation of great wealth. This is the first drawback coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue.

'And further, the bad reputation of the unvirtuous person, defective in virtue, gets spread about. This is the second drawback coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue.

'And further, whatever assembly the unvirtuous person, defective in virtue, approaches—whether of noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or contemplatives—he or she does so without confidence & abashed. This is the third drawback coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue.

'And further, the unvirtuous person, defective in virtue, dies confused. This is the fourth drawback coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue.

'And further, the unvirtuous person, defective in virtue—on the break-up of the body, after death—reappears in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. This is the fifth drawback coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue.

'These, householders, are the five drawbacks coming from an unvirtuous person's defect in virtue.

'Householders, there are these five rewards coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue. Which five?

'There is the case where a virtuous person, consummate in virtue, by reason of heedfulness acquires a great mass of wealth. This is the first reward coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue.

'And further, the fine reputation of the virtuous person, consummate in virtue, gets spread about. This is the second reward coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue.

'And further, whatever assembly the virtuous person, consummate in virtue, approaches—whether of noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or contemplatives—he or she does so with confidence & unabashed. This is the third reward coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue.

'And further, the virtuous person, consummate in virtue, dies unconfused. This is the fourth reward coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue.

'And further, the virtuous person, consummate in virtue—on the break-up of the body, after death—reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world. This is the fifth reward coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue.

'These, householders, are the five rewards coming from a virtuous person's consummation in virtue.'

Then the Blessed One—having instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged the lay followers of Pāṭali Village for a large part of the night with Dhamma talk—dismissed them, saying, 'The night is far gone, householders. Do what you think it is now time to do.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, the lay followers of Pāṭali Village got up from their seats and, bowing down to him and circumambulating him, left. Then the Blessed One, not long after they had left, entered an empty building.

Now on that occasion, Sunidha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, were building a city at Pāṭali Village to preempt the Vajjians. And on that occasion many devas by the thousands were occupying sites in Pāṭali Village. In the area where devas of great influence occupied sites, there the minds of the king's royal ministers of great influence were inclined to build their homes. In the area where devas of middling influence occupied sites, there the minds of the king's royal ministers of middling influence were inclined to build their homes. In the area where devas of low influence occupied sites, there the minds of the king's royal ministers of low influence were inclined to build their homes.

The Blessed One, with the divine eye—purified and surpassing the human—saw those devas by the thousands occupying sites in Pāṭali Village.

Then, getting up in the last watch of the night, the Blessed One addressed Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, who is building a city at Pāṭali Village?'

'Sunidha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, lord, are building a city at Pāṭali Village to preempt the Vajjians.'

'Ānanda, it's as if they had consulted the Devas of the Thirty-three: That's how Sunidha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, are building a city at Pāṭali Village to preempt the Vajjians.

'Just now, Ānanda—with the divine eye—purified and surpassing the human—I saw many devas by the thousands occupying sites in Pāṭali Village. In the area where devas of great influence occupy sites, there the minds of the king's royal ministers of great influence are inclined to build their homes. In the area where devas of middling influence occupy sites, there the minds of the king's royal ministers of middling influence are inclined to build their homes. In the area where devas of low influence occupy sites, there the minds of the king's royal ministers of low influence are inclined to build their homes.

'Ānanda, as far as the sphere of the Ariyans extends, as far as merchants' roads extend, this will be the supreme city: Pāṭaliputta, where the seedpods of the Pāṭali plant break open. There will be three dangers for Pāṭaliputta: from fire, from water, or from the breaking of alliances.'

Then Sunidha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, they stood to one side. As they were standing there, they said to him, 'May Master Gotama acquiesce to our meal today, together with the Saṅgha of monks.' The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.

Then Sunidha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha, understanding the Blessed One's acquiescence, went to their rest-house. On arrival, after having exquisite staple & non-staple food prepared in their rest-house, they announced the time to the Blessed One: 'It's time, Master Gotama. The meal is ready.'

Then the Blessed One, early in the morning, adjusted his lower robe and—taking his bowl & outer robe—went together with the Saṅgha of monks to the rest-house of Sunidha & Vassakāra, the chief ministers of Magadha. On arrival, he sat down on the seat laid out. Sunidha & Vassakāra, with their own hands, served & satisfied the Saṅgha of monks, with the Buddha at its head, with exquisite staple & non-staple food. Then, when the Blessed One had finished his meal and had rinsed his bowl & hands, Sunidha & Vassakāra, taking a low seat, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, the Blessed One gave his approval with these verses:

In whatever place

a wise person makes his dwelling,

—there providing food

for the virtuous,

the restrained,

leaders of the holy life—

he should dedicate that offering

to the devas there.

They, receiving honor, will honor him;

being respected, will show him respect.

As a result, they will feel sympathy for him,

like that of a mother for her child, her son.

A person with whom the devas sympathize

always meets with auspicious things.

Then the Blessed One, having given his approval to Sunidha & Vassakāra with these verses, got up from his seat and left. And on that occasion, Sunidha & Vassakāra followed right after the Blessed One, (thinking,) 'By whichever gate Gotama the contemplative departs today, that will be called the Gotama Gate. And by whichever ford he crosses over the Ganges River, that will be called the Gotama Ford.'

So the gate by which the Blessed One departed was called the Gotama Gate. Then he went to the Ganges River. Now on that occasion the Ganges River was full up to the banks, so that a crow could drink from it. Some people were searching for boats; some were searching for floats; some were binding rafts in hopes of going from this shore to the other. So the Blessed One—just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm—disappeared from the near bank of the Ganges River and reappeared on the far bank together with the Saṅgha of monks. He saw that some people were searching for boats; some were searching for floats; some were binding rafts in hopes of going from this shore to the other.

Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:

Those

who cross the foaming flood,

having made a bridge, avoiding the swamps

—while people are binding rafts—

intelligent people

have already crossed.
