THE GREAT TOTAL UNBINDING DISCOURSE Section 6
MAHĀ PARINIBBĀNA SUTTA  Dīgha Nikāya 16

Then the Blessed One said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Now, if the thought occurs to any of you—'The teaching has lost its arbitrator; we are without a Teacher'—do not view it in that way. Whatever Dhamma & Vinaya I have pointed out & formulated for you, that will be your Teacher after my passing.

'At present, the monks address one another as 'friend,' but after my passing they are not to address one another that way. The more senior monks are to address the newer monks by their name or clan or as 'friend.' The newer monks are to address the more senior monks as 'venerable' or 'sir.'

'After my passing, the Saṅgha—if it wants—may rescind the lesser & minor training rules.

'After my passing, the monk Channa should be given the brahma-penalty.'

'What, lord, is the brahma-penalty?'

'Channa may say what he wants, Ānanda, but he is not to be spoken to, instructed, or admonished by the monks.'

Then the Blessed One addressed the monks, 'If even a single monk has any doubt or perplexity concerning the Buddha, Dhamma, or Saṅgha, the path or the practice, ask. Don't later regret that 'The Teacher was face-to-face with us, but we didn't bring ourselves to ask a counter-question in his presence.'

When this was said, the monks were silent.

A second time, the Blessed One said, 'If even one of the monks has any doubt or perplexity concerning the Buddha, Dhamma, or Saṅgha, the path or the practice, ask. Don't later regret that 'The Teacher was face-to-face with us, but we didn't bring ourselves to ask a counter-question in his presence.'

A second time, the monks were silent.

A third time, the Blessed One said, 'If even one of the monks has any doubt or perplexity concerning the Buddha, Dhamma, or Saṅgha, the path or the practice, ask. Don't later regret that 'The Teacher was face-to-face with us, but we didn't bring ourselves to ask a counter-question in his presence.'

A third time, the monks were silent.

Then the Blessed One addressed the monks, 'Now, if it's simply out of respect for the Teacher that you don't ask, let a companion inform a companion.'

When this was said, the monks were silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One, 'It's amazing, lord. It's astounding. I have confidence in this Saṅgha of monks that there is not even a single monk in this Saṅgha of monks who has any doubt or perplexity concerning the Buddha, Dhamma, or Saṅgha, the path or the practice.'

'You, Ānanda, speak out of confidence, while there is knowledge in the Tathāgata that there is not even a single monk in this Saṅgha of monks who has any doubt or perplexity concerning the Buddha, Dhamma, or Saṅgha, the path or the practice. Of these 500 monks, the most backward is a stream-winner, never again destined for the lower realms, certain, headed for self-awakening.'

Then the Blessed One addressed the monks, 'Now, then, monks, I exhort you: All fabrications are subject to ending & decay. Reach consummation through heedfulness.' That was the Tathāgata's last statement.

Then the Blessed One entered the first jhāna. Emerging from that he entered the second jhāna. Emerging from that, he entered the third… the fourth jhāna… the dimension of the infinitude of space… the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness… the dimension of nothingness… the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging from that, he entered the cessation of perception & feeling.

Then Venerable Ānanda said to Venerable Anuruddha, 'Venerable Anuruddha, the Blessed One is totally unbound.'

'No, friend Ānanda. The Blessed One isn't totally unbound. He has entered the cessation of perception & feeling.'

Then the Blessed One, emerging from the cessation of perception & feeling, entered the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging from that, he entered the dimension of nothingness… the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness… the dimension of the infinitude of space… the fourth jhāna… the third… the second… the first jhāna. Emerging from the first jhāna he entered the second… the third… the fourth jhāna. Emerging from the fourth jhāna, he immediately totally unbound.

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, there was a great earthquake, awesome & hair-raising, and rolls of the deva-drums split (the air).

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Sahampati Brahmā uttered this verse:

All beings—all—in the world,

will cast off the bodily heap

in the world

where a Teacher like this

without peer in the world

the Tathāgata, with strength attained,

the Rightly Self-Awakened One,

has totally unbound.

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Sakka, the deva-king, uttered this verse:

How inconstant are fabrications!

Their nature: to arise & pass away.

They disband       as they are arising.

Their total stilling is bliss.

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Venerable Anuruddha uttered this verse:

He had no in-&-out breathing,

the firm-minded one, the one who was Such,

imperturbable

& intent on peace:

the sage completing his span.

With heart unbowed

he endured the pain.

Like a flame's unbinding

was the liberation

of awareness.

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Venerable Ānanda uttered this verse:

It was awe-inspiring.

It was hair-raising

when, displaying the foremost

accomplishment in all things,

the Rightly Self-Awakened One

totally unbound.

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, some of the monks present who were not without passion wept, uplifting their arms. As if their feet were cut out from under them, they fell down and rolled back & forth, crying, 'All too soon has the Blessed One totally unbound! All too soon has the One Well-Gone totally unbound! All too soon has the One with Eyes disappeared from the world!' But those monks who were free from passion acquiesced, mindful & alert: 'Inconstant are fabrications. What else is there to expect?'

Then Venerable Anuruddha addressed the monks, 'Enough, friends. Don't grieve. Don't lament. Hasn't the Blessed One already taught the state of growing different with regard to all things dear & appealing, the state of becoming separate, the state of becoming otherwise? What else is there to expect? It's impossible that one could forbid anything born, existent, fabricated, & subject to disintegration from disintegrating. The devatās, friends, are complaining.'

[Venerable Ānanda:] 'But, Venerable Anuruddha, what is the state of the devatās you are paying attention to?'

'Friend Ānanda, there are devatās who perceive space to be earth. Tearing at their hair, they are weeping. Uplifting their arms, they are weeping. As if their feet were cut out from under them, they fall down and roll back & forth, crying, 'All too soon has the Blessed One totally unbound! All too soon has the One Well-Gone totally unbound! All too soon, has the One with Eyes disappeared from the world!' Then there are devatās who perceive earth to be earth. Tearing at their hair, they are weeping. Uplifting their arms, they are weeping. As if their feet were cut out from under them, they fall down and roll back & forth, crying, 'All too soon has the Blessed One totally unbound! All too soon has the One Well-Gone totally unbound! All too soon has the One with Eyes disappeared from the world!' But those devatās who are free from passion acquiesce, mindful & alert: 'Inconstant are fabrications. What else is there to expect?'

Then Venerable Anuruddha & Venerable Ānanda spent the remainder of the night in Dhamma talk.

Then Venerable Anuruddha said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Go, friend Ānanda. Entering Kusinārā, announce to the Kusinārā Mallans, 'The Blessed One, Vāsiṭṭhas, has totally unbound. Now is the time for you to do as you see fit.'

Responding, 'As you say, sir,' to Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Ānanda in the early morning adjusted his lower robe and—taking his bowl & outer robe—went unaccompanied into Kusinārā. Now at that time the Kusinārā Mallans had met for some business in their reception hall. Venerable Ānanda went to the reception hall and on arrival announced to them, 'The Blessed One, Vāsiṭṭhas, has totally unbound. Now is the time for you to do as you see fit.'

When they heard Venerable Ānanda, the Mallans together with their sons, daughters, & wives were shocked, saddened, their minds overflowing with sorrow. Some of them wept, tearing at their hair; they wept, uplifting their arms. As if their feet were cut out from under them, they fell down and rolled back & forth, crying, 'All too soon has the Blessed One totally unbound! All too soon has the One Well-Gone totally unbound! All too soon has the One with Eyes disappeared from the world!'

Then the Kusinārā Mallans ordered their men, 'In that case, I say, gather scents, garlands, & all the musical instruments in Kusinārā!' Then, taking scents, garlands, & all the musical instruments in Kusinārā, along with 500 pairs of cloth, the Kusinārā Mallans went to the Blessed One's body in Upavattana, the Mallans' Sal Forest near Kusinārā. On arrival, they spent the entire day in worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating the Blessed One's body with dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents, in making cloth canopies and arranging floral wreaths. Then the thought occurred to them, 'It's too late today to cremate the Blessed One's body. We'll cremate the Blessed One's body tomorrow.' And so they spent the second day, the third day, the fourth day, the fifth day, the sixth day in worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating the Blessed One's body with dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents, in making cloth canopies and arranging floral wreaths.

Then on the seventh day the thought occurred to them, 'Worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating to the Blessed One's body with dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents, let's carry it to the south, around the outside of the town, and cremate it to the south of the town.'

Then eight leading Mallans, having bathed their heads and wearing new linen cloth, thinking, 'We'll lift up the Blessed One's body,' were unable to lift it. So the Kusinārā Mallans asked Venerable Anuruddha, 'What is the reason, Venerable Anuruddha, what is the cause, why these eight leading Mallans, having bathed their heads and wearing new linen cloth, thinking, 'We'll lift up the Blessed One's body,' are unable to lift it?'

'Your intention, Vāsiṭṭhas, is one thing. The devas' intention is another.'

'But what, Venerable Anuruddha, is the devas' intention?'

'Your intention, Vāsiṭṭhas, is, 'Worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating the Blessed One's body with dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents, let's carry it to the south, around the outside of the town, and cremate it to the south of the town.' The devas' intention is, 'Worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating the Blessed One's body with heavenly dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents, lets carry it to the north of the town, enter the town through the north gate, carry it through the middle of the town and out the east gate to the Mallans' shrine called Makuṭa-bandhana, to cremate it there.'

'Then let it be, venerable sir, in line with the devas' intention.'

Now on that occasion Kusinārā—even to its rubbish heaps & cesspools—was strewn knee-deep in coral-tree flowers. So the devas & the Kusinārā Mallans, worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating the Blessed One's body with heavenly & human dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents, carried it to the north of the town, entered the town through the north gate, carried it through the middle of the town and out the east gate to the Mallans' shrine called Makuṭa-bandhana. There they set it down.

Then the Kusinārā Mallans said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Venerable sir, what course should we follow with regard to the Tathāgata's body?'

'The course they follow with regard to a wheel-turning monarch's body, Vāsiṭṭhas, is the course that should be followed with regard to the Tathāgata's body.'

'And what, venerable sir, is the course they follow with regard to a wheel-turning monarch's body?'

'Vāsiṭṭhas, they wrap the wheel-turning monarch's body in new linen cloth. Having wrapped it in new linen cloth, they wrap it in teased cotton-wool. Having wrapped it in teased cotton-wool, they wrap it in new linen cloth. Having done this five hundred times, they place the body in an iron oil-vat, cover it with an iron lid, make a pyre composed totally of perfumed substances, and cremate the body. Then they build a burial mound for the wheel-turning monarch at a great four-way intersection. That is the course that they follow with regard to the wheel-turning monarch's body. The course they follow with regard to a wheel-turning monarch's body, Vāsiṭṭhas, is the course that should be followed with regard to the Tathāgata's body. A burial mound for the Tathāgata is to be built at a great, four-way intersection. And those who offer a garland, a scent, or a perfume powder there, or bow down there, or brighten their minds there: that will be for their long-term welfare & happiness.'

So the Kusinārā Mallans ordered their men, 'In that case, I say, gather the Mallans' teased cotton-wool.'

Then they wrapped the Blessed One's body in new linen cloth. Having wrapped it in new linen cloth, they wrapped it in teased cotton-wool. Having wrapped it in teased cotton-wool, they wrapped it in new linen cloth. Having done this five hundred times, they placed the body in an iron oil-vat, covered it with an iron lid, made a pyre composed totally of perfumed substances, and set the body on the pyre.

Now on that occasion Venerable Mahā Kassapa was traveling on the highway from Pāvā to Kusinārā with a large Saṅgha of monks, approximately 500 monks in all. Leaving the road, he sat down at the root of a tree. Meanwhile, a certain Ājīvakan ascetic, carrying a coral-tree flower from Kusinārā, was traveling on the highway to Pāvā. Venerable Mahā Kassapa saw the Ājīvakan ascetic coming from afar, and on seeing him said to him, 'Do you know our teacher, friend?'

'Yes, friend, I know him. Seven days ago Gotama the contemplative totally unbound. That's how I got this coral-tree flower.'

With that, some of the monks present who were not without passion wept, uplifting their arms. As if their feet were cut out from under them, they fell down and rolled back & forth, crying, 'All too soon has the Blessed One totally unbound! All too soon has the One Well-Gone totally unbound! All too soon has the One with Eyes disappeared from the world!' But those monks who were free from passion acquiesced, mindful & alert: 'Inconstant are fabrications. What else is there to expect?'

Now at that time a monk named Subhadda, who had gone forth when old, was sitting among the group. He said to the monks, 'Enough, friends. Don't grieve. Don't lament. We're well rid of the Great Contemplative. We've been harassed by (his saying,) 'This is allowable. This is not allowable.' But now we will do what we want to do, and not do what we don't want to do.'

Then Venerable Mahā Kassapa addressed the monks, 'Enough, friends. Don't grieve. Don't lament. Hasn't the Blessed One already taught the state of growing different with regard to all things dear & appealing, the state of becoming separate, the state of becoming otherwise? What else is there to expect? It's impossible that one could forbid anything born, existent, fabricated, & subject to disintegration from disintegrating.'

Then four leading Mallans, having bathed their heads and wearing new linen cloth, thinking, 'We'll ignite the Blessed One's pyre,' were unable to ignite it. So the Kusinārā Mallans asked Venerable Anuruddha, 'What is the reason, Venerable Anuruddha, what is the cause, why these four leading Mallans, having bathed their heads and wearing new linen cloth, thinking, 'We'll ignite the Blessed One's pyre,' are unable to ignite it?'

'Your intention, Vāsiṭṭhas, is one thing. The devas' intention is another.'

'But what, Venerable Anuruddha, is the devas' intention?'

'The devas' intention, Vāsiṭṭhas, is, 'This Venerable Mahā Kassapa is traveling on the highway from Pāvā to Kusinārā with a large Saṅgha of monks, approximately 500 monks in all. The Blessed One's pyre will not catch fire until Venerable Mahā Kassapa has worshipped the Blessed One's feet with his bathed head.'

'Then let it be, venerable sir, in line with the devas' intention.'

So Venerable Mahā Kassapa went to the Blessed One's pyre at Makuṭa-bandhana, the Mallans' memorial near Kusinārā. On arrival, arranging his robe over one shoulder, he placed his hands palm-to-palm over his heart, circumambulated the pyre three times, uncovered the Blessed One's feet, and worshipped them with his head. And the 500 monks, arranging their robes over one shoulder, placed their hands palm-to-palm over their hearts, circumambulated the pyre three times, and worshipped the Blessed One's feet with their heads. As soon as it had been worshipped by Venerable Mahā Kassapa and the 500 monks, the Blessed One's pyre caught fire of its own accord. In the burning of the Blessed One's body, no cinder or ash of the outer skin, inner skin, flesh, tendons, or oil of the joints could be discerned. Only the bone-relics remained. Just as in the burning of ghee or oil, no cinder or ash can be discerned; in the same way, in the burning of the Blessed One's body, no cinder or ash of the outer skin, inner skin, flesh, tendons, or oil of the joints could be discerned. Only the bone-relics remained. And of the five hundred twin-wrappings, only two were burnt: the innermost & the outermost.

When the Blessed One's body was consumed, a cascade of water falling from the sky extinguished [nibbāpesi] the Blessed One's pyre. Water shooting up from a Sal tree as well extinguished the Blessed One's pyre. The Kusinārā Mallans, with all kinds of scented water, extinguished the Blessed One's pyre. Then for seven days the Kusinārā Mallans kept the bone-relics in their reception hall—setting them round with a lattice of spears surrounded by ramparts of bows—worshipping, honoring, respecting, & venerating them with dances, songs, music, garlands, & scents.

Then King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So he sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was a noble warrior. I, too, am a noble warrior. I deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. I, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

The Licchavis of Vesālī heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So they sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was a noble warrior. We, too, are noble warriors. We deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. We, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So they sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was the greatest of our relatives. We deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. We, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

The Thulayans of Allakappa.… The Koliyans of Rāmagāma heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So they sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was a noble warrior. We, too, are noble warriors. We deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. We, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

The brahman of Veṭṭha Island heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So he sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was a noble warrior. I am a brahman. I deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. I, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

The Pāvā Mallans heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So they sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was a noble warrior. We, too, are noble warriors. We deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. We, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

When this was said, the Kusinārā Mallans said to the groups & factions, 'The Blessed One totally unbound within the borders of our own town. We will not give up a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics.'

When this was said, Doṇa the brahman addressed the groups & factions,

'Listen, good sirs,

to a word from me.

Our Awakened One was a teacher

of forbearance.

It's not good that there should be combat

over the sharing of the relics

of the highest person.

Let us, masters, unite in concord,

on friendly terms,

and make eight shares.

Let there be

burial mounds

in the various directions,

many people made confident

in the One with Eyes.'

'In that case, brahman, you yourself divide the Blessed One's bone-relics into eight equal shares.'

Responding, 'As you say, good sirs,' to the groups & factions, Doṇa the brahman divided the Blessed One's bone-relics into eight equal shares and then said to the groups & factions, 'Good sirs, give me this urn. I will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for the urn.' They gave him the urn.

Then the Moriyans of Pipphalivana heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, has totally unbound in Kusinārā.' So they sent an envoy to the Kusinārā Mallans: 'The Blessed One was a noble warrior. We, too, are noble warriors. We deserve a share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. We, too, will build a burial mound and hold a ceremony for them.'

'There is no (remaining) share of the Blessed One's bone-relics. They have been divided. Take the ashes from here.' They took the ashes from there.

Then King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Rājagaha.

The Licchavis of Vesālī built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Vesālī.

The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Kapilavatthu.

The Thulayans of Allakappa built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Allakappa.

The Koliyans of Rāmagāma built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Rāmagāma.

The brahman of Veṭṭha Island built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics on Veṭṭha Island.

The Pāvā Mallans built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Pāvā.

The Kusinārā Mallans built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the Blessed One's relics in Kusinārā.

Doṇa the brahman built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the urn.

The Moriyans of Pipphalivana built a burial mound and held a ceremony for the embers in Pipphalivana.

Thus there were eight burial mounds for the bone-relics, a ninth for the urn, and a tenth for the embers.

That is how it was in the past.

Eight portions were the relics

of the One with Eyes,

the highest, the foremost of men:

seven honored in Jambudīpa,

and one in Rāmagāma

honored by kings of the nāgas.

One tooth

the Devas of the Thirty-three worship;

one is honored in Gandhārapura;

one in the realm of the king of Kāliṅga;

another is honored by kings of the nāgas.

These, with their splendor,

their excellent gifts,

embellish this wealth-bearing earth.

Thus the relics of the One with Eyes

are honored by those honored

by those who are honored.

He is worshiped by deva kings,

nāga kings, human kings,

and likewise is worshiped

by the most excellent people.

So pay homage to him,

with hands palm-to-palm

over the heart,

for the Awakened are rarely encountered

in the course of one hundred eons.