THE GREAT TOTAL UNBINDING DISCOURSE Section 4
MAHĀ PARINIBBĀNA SUTTA  Dīgha Nikāya 16

Then the Blessed One, early in the morning, adjusted his lower robe and—taking his bowl & outer robe—went into Vesālī for alms. Having gone for alms in Vesālī, after the meal, returning from his alms round, gazing on Vesālī with an elephant's look, he addressed Venerable Ānanda: 'Ānanda, this is the Tathāgata's last look at Vesālī. Come, Ānanda, we will head for Bhaṇḍa Village.

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, together with a large Saṅgha of monks, went to Bhaṇḍa Village. There the Blessed One stayed near Bhaṇḍa Village.

And there he addressed the monks, 'It's through not awakening to or penetrating four qualities, monks, that we have transmigrated and wandered on for such a long time, you & I. Which four?

'It's through not awakening to or penetrating noble virtue that we have transmigrated and wandered on for such a long time, you & I. It's through not awakening to or penetrating noble concentration… It's through not awakening to or penetrating noble discernment… It's through not awakening to or penetrating noble release that we have transmigrated and wandered on for such a long time, you & I.

'(But now,) this noble virtue has been awakened to & penetrated, noble concentration has been awakened to & penetrated, noble discernment has been awakened to & penetrated, noble release has been awakened to & penetrated. Craving for becoming has been crushed, the guide to becoming [i e, clinging] is ended. There now is no further-becoming.'

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said it, the Teacher, the One Well-Gone, said further:

Virtue, concentration, discernment,

and unexcelled release:

These qualities have been awakened to

by Gotama, the prestigious.

Directly knowing this, he shows it to the monks—

the awakened one,

the teacher who has made an ending of stress,

the one with eyes,

totally unbound.

While staying there at Bhaṇḍa Village, the Blessed One often gave this Dhamma talk to the monks: 'Such is virtue, such is concentration, such is discernment. Concentration nurtured with virtue is of great fruit, great reward. Discernment nurtured with concentration is of great fruit, great reward. The mind nurtured with discernment is rightly released from the effluents, i e, the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance.'

Then the Blessed One, having stayed near Bhaṇḍa Village as long as he pleased, said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Come, Ānanda, we will head for Hatthi Village, Amba Village, Jambu Village, to Bhoganagara.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, together with a large Saṅgha of monks, went to Bhoganagara. There the Blessed One stayed near Bhoganagara at the Ānanda shrine.

There the Blessed One addressed the monks, 'Monks, I will teach you four great standards. Listen and pay careful attention.'

'As you say, lord,' the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, 'There is the case where a monk says this: 'Face-to-face with the Blessed One have I heard this, face-to-face have I received this: This is the Dhamma, this is the Vinaya, this is the Teacher's instruction.' His statement is neither to be approved nor scorned. Without approval or scorn, take careful note of his words and make them stand against the suttas and tally them against the Vinaya. If, on making them stand against the suttas and tallying them against the Vinaya, you find that they don't stand with the suttas or tally with the Vinaya, you may conclude: 'This is not the word of the Blessed One; this monk has misunderstood it'—and you should reject it. But if, on making them stand against the suttas and tallying them against the Vinaya, you find that they stand with the suttas and tally with the Vinaya, you may conclude: 'This is the word of the Blessed One; this monk has understood it rightly.'

'Then there is the case where a monk says this: 'In a monastery over there dwells a Saṅgha with well-known leading elders. Face-to-face with that Saṅgha I have heard this, face-to-face have I received this: This is the Dhamma, this is the Vinaya, this is the Teacher's instruction.' …

'Then there is the case where a monk says this: 'In a monastery over there dwell many learned elder monks, well-versed in the tradition, who have memorized the Dhamma, the Vinaya, and the Mātikā. Face-to-face with those elders I have heard this, face-to-face have I received this: This is the Dhamma, this is the Vinaya, this is the Teacher's instruction.' …

'Then there is the case where a monk says this: 'In a monastery over there dwells a learned elder monk, well-versed in the tradition, who has memorized the Dhamma, the Vinaya, and the Mātikā. Face-to-face with that elder I have heard this, face-to-face have I received this: This is the Dhamma, this is the Vinaya, this is the Teacher's instruction.' His statement is neither to be approved nor scorned. Without approval or scorn, take careful note of his words and make them stand against the suttas and tally them against the Vinaya. If, on making them stand against the suttas and tallying them against the Vinaya, you find that they don't stand with the suttas or tally with the Vinaya, you may conclude: 'This is not the word of the Blessed One; this monk has misunderstood it'—and you should reject it. But if, on making them stand against the suttas and tallying them against the Vinaya, you find that they stand with the suttas and tally with the Vinaya, you may conclude: 'This is the word of the Blessed One; this monk has understood it rightly.'

'Monks, remember these four great standards.'

While staying there near Bhoganagara at the Ānanda shrine, the Blessed One often gave this Dhamma talk to the monks: 'Such is virtue, such is concentration, such is discernment. Concentration nurtured with virtue is of great fruit, great reward. Discernment nurtured with concentration is of great fruit, great reward. The mind nurtured with discernment is rightly released from the effluents, i e, the effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance.'

Then the Blessed One, having stayed near Bhoganagara at the Ānanda shrine as long as he pleased, said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Come, Ānanda, we will head for Pāvā.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, together with a large Saṅgha of monks, went to Pāvā. There the Blessed One stayed near Pāvā in the mango grove of Cunda the silversmith.

Cunda the silversmith heard, 'The Blessed One, they say, on reaching Pāvā, is staying near Pāvā in my mango grove.'

So Cunda went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged him with Dhamma talk. Then Cunda—instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged by the Blessed One's Dhamma talk—said to him, 'Lord, may the Blessed One acquiesce to my meal tomorrow, together with the Saṅgha of monks.'

The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.

Then Cunda, understanding the Blessed One's acquiescence, got up from his seat and, bowing down to him and circumambulating him, left. Then, at the end of the night, after having exquisite staple & non-staple food—including a large amount of pig-delicacy—prepared in his own home, he announced the time to the Blessed One: 'It's time, lord. The meal is ready.'

Then the Blessed One, early in the morning, adjusted his lower robe and—taking his bowl & outer robe—went together with the Saṅgha of monks to Cunda's home. On arrival, he sat down on the seat laid out. Seated, he said to Cunda, 'Cunda, serve me with the pig-delicacy you have had prepared, and the Saṅgha of monks with the other staple & non-staple food you have had prepared.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Cunda served the Blessed One with the pig-delicacy he had had prepared, and the Saṅgha of monks with the other staple & non-staple food he had had prepared. Then the Blessed One said to him, 'Cunda, bury the remaining pig-delicacy in a pit. I don't see anyone in the world together with its devas, Māras, &Brahmās, in this generation with its contemplatives &brahmans, its rulers &commonfolk, in whom, when it was ingested, it would go to a healthy change, aside from the Tathāgata.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Cunda buried the remaining pig-delicacy in a pit, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One—after instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging him with Dhamma talk—got up from his seat and left.

Then in the Blessed One, after he had eaten Cunda's meal, there arose a severe disease accompanied with (the passing of) blood, with intense pains & deadly. But the Blessed One endured it—mindful, alert, & not struck down by it.

Then he addressed Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, we will go to Kusinārā.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

I have heard that,

on eating Cunda the silversmith's meal,

the enlightened one was touched by illness—

fierce, deadly.

After he had eaten the pig-delicacy,

a fierce sickness arose in the Teacher.

After being purged of it,

the Blessed One said,

'To the city of Kusinārā

I will go.'

Then the Blessed One, going down from the road, went to a certain tree and, on arrival, said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, please arrange my outer robe folded in four. I am tired. I will sit down.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Venerable Ānanda arranged the outer robe folded in four. The Blessed One sat down on the seat laid out.

Seated, he said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, please fetch me some water. I am thirsty. I will drink.'

When this was said, Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One, 'Lord, just now 500 carts have passed through. The meager river—cut by the wheels—flows turbid & disturbed. But the Kakudha river is not far away, with pristine water, pleasing water, cool water, pellucid water, with restful banks, refreshing. There the Blessed One will drink potable water and cool his limbs.'

A second time, the Blessed One said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, please fetch me some water. I am thirsty. I will drink.'

A second time, Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One, 'Lord, just now 500 carts have passed through. The meager water—cut by the wheels—flows turbid & disturbed. But the Kakudha River is not far away, with pristine water, pleasing water, cool water, pellucid water, with restful banks, refreshing. There the Blessed One will drink potable water and cool his limbs.'

A third time, the Blessed One said to Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, please fetch me some water. I am thirsty. I will drink.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Venerable Ānanda—taking a bowl—went to the river. And the meager river that, cut by the wheels, had been flowing turbid & disturbed, on his approach flowed pristine, clear, & undisturbed. The thought occurred to him, 'How amazing! How astounding!—the great power & great might of the Tathāgata!—in that this meager river that, cut by the wheels, was flowing turbid & disturbed, on my approach flowed pristine, clear, & undisturbed!' Fetching water with the bowl, he went to the Blessed One and on arrival said, 'How amazing! How astounding!—the great power & great might of the Tathāgata!—in that this meager river that, cut by the wheels, was flowing turbid & disturbed, on my approach flowed pristine, clear, & undisturbed! Drink the water, O Blessed One! Drink the water, O One Well-Gone!'

Then the Blessed One drank the water.

Now on that occasion Pukkusa Mallaputta, a disciple of Āḷāra Kālāma was traveling on the road from Kusinārā to Pāvā. He saw the Blessed One sitting at the root of a tree and, on seeing him, approached him. On arrival, having bowed down to him, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One, 'It's amazing, lord. It's astounding: the peaceful abiding by which those gone forth abide. Once, Āḷāra Kālāma, while traveling, went down from the road and sat not far away at the root of a tree for the day's abiding. Then 500 carts passed by right near him. Then a certain man, coming along right behind those hundreds of carts, approached Āḷāra Kālāma and, on arrival, said to him, 'Venerable sir, did you see 500 carts going past?' 'No, friend, I didn't.' 'But did you hear the sound?' 'No, friend, I didn't.' 'But were you asleep?' 'No, friend, I wasn't asleep.' 'But were you conscious?' 'Yes, friend.' 'Then, venerable sir, being conscious & awake when 500 carts passed by right near you, you neither saw them nor heard a sound. And yet your outer robe is covered with (their) dust!' 'Yes, friend.' Then the thought occurred to that man, 'How amazing! How astounding: the peaceful abiding by which those gone forth abide—in that, being conscious & awake when 500 carts passed by right near, he would neither see them nor hear a sound!' Having proclaimed immense conviction in Āḷāra Kālāma, he then left.'

'What do you think, Pukkusa? Which is more difficult to do, more difficult to master: one who, being conscious & awake when 500 carts passed by right near, would neither see them nor hear a sound; or one who, being conscious & awake when the rain-deva was raining, the rain-deva was pouring, lightning-streaks were shooting out, and a thunderbolt split (the air), would neither see them nor hear a sound?'

'Lord, what would 500 carts amount to—or 600 carts, or 700 carts, or 800 carts, or 900 carts, or 1,000 carts… or 100,000 carts? That would be more difficult to do, more difficult to master: one who, being conscious & awake when the rain-deva was raining, the rain-deva was pouring, lightning-streaks were shooting out, and a thunderbolt split (the air), would neither see them nor hear a sound.'

'One time, Pukkusa, I was staying near Ātumā in a threshing barn. And on that occasion, when the rain-deva was raining, the rain-deva was pouring, lightning-streaks were shooting out, and a thunderbolt split (the air) not far from the threshing barn, two farmers—brothers—were killed, along with four oxen.

'Then a large crowd of people came out of Ātumā to where the two farmers—brothers—were killed, along with the four oxen. And on that occasion I, having come out of the threshing barn, was doing walking meditation in front of the door to the threshing barn. A certain man from the great crowd of people approached me and, on arrival, having bowed down to me, stood to one side. As he was standing there, I said to him, 'Why, friend, has this great crowd of people gathered?'

'Just now, lord—when the rain-deva was raining, the rain-deva was pouring, lightning-streaks were shooting out, and a thunderbolt split (the air)—two farmers—brothers—were killed, along with four oxen. That's why this great crowd of people has gathered. But you, lord: Where were you?'

'I was right here, friend.'

'But did you see anything?'

'No, friend, I didn't.'

'But did you hear the sound?'

'No, friend, I didn't.'

'But were you asleep?'

'No, friend, I wasn't asleep.'

'But were you conscious?'

'Yes, friend.'

'Then, lord, being conscious & awake when the rain-deva was raining, the rain-deva was pouring, lightning-streaks were shooting out, and a thunderbolt split (the air), you neither saw anything nor heard a sound.'

'Yes, friend.'

'Then the thought occurred to that man, 'How amazing! How astounding: the peaceful abiding by which those gone forth abide—in that, when the rain-deva was raining, the rain-deva was pouring, lightning-streaks were shooting out, and a thunderbolt split (the air), he would neither see them nor hear a sound!' Having proclaimed immense conviction in me, he circumambulated me and then left.'

When this was said, Pukkusa Mallaputta said to the Blessed One, 'The conviction I had in Āḷāra Kālāma I winnow before a high wind or wash away in the swift current of a river. Magnificent, lord! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has the Blessed One—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear. I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of monks. May the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life.'

Then Pukkusa Mallaputta addressed a certain man, 'Come now, I say. Fetch me a pair of gold-colored robes, ready to wear.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to Pukkusa Mallaputta, the man fetched the pair of gold-colored robes, ready to wear. Then Pukkusa Mallaputta presented the pair of gold-colored robes, ready to wear, to the Blessed One, (saying,) 'May the Blessed One accept from me this pair of gold-colored robes, ready to wear, out of kindness.'

'Very well, then, Pukkusa. Clothe me with one, and Ānanda with the other.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Pukkusa Mallaputta clothed the Blessed One with one, and Venerable Ānanda with the other.

Then the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged Pukkusa Mallaputta with Dhamma talk. Then Pukkusa Mallaputta—instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged with the Blessed One's Dhamma talk—got up from his seat and, bowing down to the Blessed One and circumambulating him, left.

Then not long after Pukkusa Mallaputta had left, Venerable Ānanda placed the pair of gold-colored robes, ready to wear, against the Blessed One's body. Placed against the Blessed One's body, their iridescence seemed as if destroyed.

Then Venerable Ānanda said, 'It's amazing, lord. It's astounding—how clear & bright the color of the Tathāgata's skin! When this pair of gold-colored robes, ready to wear, is placed against the Blessed One's body, their iridescence seems as if destroyed!'

'So it is, Ānanda. There are two times when the color of the Tathāgata's skin is especially clear & bright. Which two? The night on which the Tathāgata awakens to the unexcelled self-awakening, and the night on which the Tathāgata totally unbinds by means of the unbinding property with no fuel remaining. These are the two times when the color of the Tathāgata's skin is especially clear & bright. Today, in the last watch of the night, between the twin Sal trees in Upavattana, the Mallans' Sal Forest near Kusinārā, the Tathāgata's total unbinding will occur.

'Come, Ānanda, we will head for Kakudha River.'

'As you say, lord,' Venerable Ānanda responded to the Blessed One.

Pukkusa offered a pair of gold-colored robes

clothed in which,

the Teacher of golden complexion

shone brightly.

Then the Blessed One, together with the large Saṅgha of monks, went to the Kakudha River and, after arriving at the Kakudha River, going down, bathing, drinking, & coming back out, went to a mango grove. On arrival, the Blessed One said to Venerable Cundaka, 'Cundaka, please arrange my outer robe folded in four. I am tired. I will lie down.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to the Blessed One, Venerable Cundaka arranged the outer robe folded in four. The Blessed One, lying on his right side, took up the lion's posture, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful, alert, and attending to the perception of getting up. Venerable Cundaka sat in front of him.

The awakened one,

—having gone to the little Kakudha river

with its pristine, pleasing water, clear—

the Teacher, seeming very tired,

the Tathāgata, unequalled in the world

went down, bathed, drank, & came out.

Honored, surrounded,

in the midst of the group of monks,

the Blessed One, Teacher,

proceeding here in the Dhamma,

the great seer,

went to the mango grove.

He addressed the monk named Cundaka,

'Spread it out, folded in four

for me to lie down.'

Ordered by the One of developed mind,

Cundaka quickly set it out, folded in four.

The Teacher lay down, seeming very tired,

and Cundaka sat down there before him.

Then the Blessed One addressed Venerable Ānanda, 'Ānanda, if anyone tries to incite remorse in Cunda the silversmith, saying, 'It's no gain for you, friend Cunda, it's ill-done by you, that the Tathāgata, having eaten your last alms, totally unbound,' then Cunda's remorse should be allayed (in this way): 'It's a gain for you, friend Cunda, it's well-done by you, that the Tathāgata, having eaten your last alms, totally unbound. Face to face with the Blessed One have I heard it, face to face have I learned it, 'These two alms are equal to each other in fruit, equal to each other in result, of much greater fruit & reward than any other alms. Which two? The alms that, after having eaten it, the Tathāgata awakens to the unexcelled right self-awakening. And the alms that, after having eaten it, the Tathāgata unbinds by means of the unbinding property with no fuel remaining. These are the two alms that are equal to each other in fruit, equal to each other in result, of much greater fruit & reward than any other alms. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to long life. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to beauty. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to happiness. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to heaven. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to rank. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to sovereignty.' In this way, Ānanda, Cunda the silversmith's remorse should be allayed.'

Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:

For a person giving,

merit increases.

For one self-restraining,

no animosity is amassed.

One who is skillful

leaves evil behind

and

—from the ending of

passion,

aversion,

delusion—

totally unbinds.
