ITIVUTTAKA 110

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'If, while he is walking, monks, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he does not quickly abandon, dispel, demolish, or wipe that thought out of existence, then a monk walking with such a lack of ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously lethargic & low in his persistence.

'If, while he is standing.…

'If, while he is sitting.…

'If, while he is lying down, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he does not quickly abandon, dispel, demolish, or wipe that thought out of existence, then a monk lying down with such a lack of ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously lethargic & low in his persistence.

'But if, while he is walking, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he quickly abandons, dispels, demolishes, & wipes that thought out of existence, then a monk walking with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.

'If, while he is standing.…

'If, while he is sitting.…

'If, while he is lying down, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he quickly abandons, dispels, demolishes, & wipes that thought out of existence, then a monk lying down with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.'

Whether walking, standing,

sitting, or lying down,

whoever thinks evil thoughts,

related to the household life,

is following no path at all,

smitten

with delusory things.

He's incapable,

a monk like this,

of touching superlative

self-awakening.

But whoever–

walking, standing,

sitting, or lying down–

overcomes thought,

delighting in the stilling of thought:

he's capable,

a monk like this,

of touching superlative

self-awakening.