ITIVUTTAKA 111

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Be consummate in virtue, monks, and consummate in the Pāṭimokkha. Dwell restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in your behavior & sphere of activity. Train yourselves, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.

'When one is consummate in virtue, consummate in the Pāṭimokkha; dwelling restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in one's behavior & sphere of activity; training oneself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults–what more is to be done?

'If, while he is walking, any greed in a monk is done away with, any ill will… any sloth & torpor… any restlessness & anxiety is done away with, any uncertainty is abandoned; if his persistence is aroused and not lax; if his mindfulness is established & unmuddled; if his body is calm & unaroused; if his mind is centered & unified: then a monk walking with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.

'If, while he is standing.…

'If, while he is sitting.…

'If, while he is lying down, any greed in a monk is done away with, any ill will… any sloth & torpor… any restlessness & anxiety is done away with, any uncertainty is abandoned; if his persistence is aroused and not lax; if his mindfulness is established & unmuddled; if his body is calm & unaroused; if his mind is centered & unified: then a monk lying down with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.'

Controlled in walking,

controlled in standing,

controlled in sitting,

controlled in lying down,

controlled in flexing & extending his limbs

–above, around, & below,

as far as the worlds extend–

observing the arising & passing away

of phenomena,

of aggregates:

a monk who dwells thus ardently,

not restlessly, at peace–

always

mindful,

training in the mastery

of awareness-tranquility–

is said to be continually

resolute.