ITIVUTTAKA 27

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.

'Just as the radiance of all the stars does not equal one-sixteenth of the radiance of the moon, as the moon–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles, even so, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.

'Just as in the last month of the rains, in autumn, when the sky is clear & cloudless, the sun, on ascending the sky, overpowers the space immersed in darkness, shines, blazes, & dazzles, even so, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.

'Just as in the last stage of the night the morning star shines, blazes, & dazzles, even so, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.'

When one develops–mindful–

good will without limit,

fetters are worn through,

on seeing the ending

of acquisitions.

If with uncorrupted mind

you feel good will

for even            one being,

you become skilled from that.

But a noble one produces

a mind of sympathy

for                     all beings,

an abundance of merit.

Kingly seers, who conquered the earth

swarming with beings,

went about making sacrifices:

the horse sacrifice, human sacrifice,

water rites, soma rites,

& the 'Unobstructed,'

but these don't equal

one sixteenth

of a well-developed mind of good will–

as all the constellations don't,

one sixteenth

of the radiance of the moon.

One who

neither kills

nor gets others to kill,

neither conquers,

nor gets others to conquer,

with good will for all beings,

has no hostility with anyone

at all.