ITIVUTTAKA 83

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard:

'Monks, when a deva is about to pass away from the company of devas, five omens appear: his garlands wither, his clothes get soiled, sweat comes out of his armpits, a dullness descends on his body, he no longer delights in his own deva-seat. The devas, knowing from this that 'This deva-son is about to pass away,' encourage him with three sayings: 'Go from here, honorable sir, to a good destination. Having gone to a good destination, gain the gain that is good to gain. Having gained the gain that is good to gain, become well-established.'

When this was said, a certain monk said to the Blessed One, 'What, lord, is the devas' reckoning of going to a good destination? What is their reckoning of the gain that is good to gain? What is their reckoning of becoming well-established?'

'The human state, monks, is the devas' reckoning of going to a good destination. Having become a human being, acquiring conviction in the Dhamma-&-Vinaya taught by the Tathāgata: this is the devas' reckoning of the gain that is good to gain. When that conviction is settled within one–rooted, established, & strong, not to be destroyed by any brahman or contemplative; deva, Māra, or Brahma; or anyone else in the world: this is the devas' reckoning of becoming well-established.'

When a deva passes away

from the company of devas

through his life-span's ending,

three sounds sound forth

–the devas' encouragement.

'Go from here,

honorable sir,

to a good destination,

to companionship

with human beings.

On becoming a human being,

acquire a conviction

unsurpassed

in True Dhamma.

That conviction of yours

in True Dhamma, well-taught,

should be

settled,

rooted,

established,

–undestroyed

as long as you live.

Having abandoned

bodily misconduct,

verbal misconduct,

mental misconduct,

and whatever else is flawed;

having done with the body what's skillful,

and much that is skillful with speech,

having done what's skillful

with a heart without limit,

with no acquisitions,

then–having made much of the merit

that's a ground for spontaneously arising [in heaven]

through giving–

establish other mortals

in

True Dhamma &

the holy life.'

With this sympathy, the devas–

when they know a deva is passing away–

encourage him:

'Come back, deva,

again & again.'