ITIVUTTAKA 84

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these three persons, appearing in the world, appear for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine. Which three?

'There is the case where a Tathāgata appears in the world, worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unsurpassed trainer of tamable people, teacher of beings human & divine, awakened, blessed. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. This is the first person who, appearing in the world, appears for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.

'Furthermore, there is the disciple of that Teacher who is a worthy one, his effluents ended, who has reached fulfillment, done the task, laid down the burden, attained the true goal, totally destroyed the fetter of becoming, and who is released through right gnosis. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. This is the second person who, appearing in the world, appears for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.

'Furthermore, there is the disciple of that Teacher who is one who follows the practice for one in training, erudite, having entered into [good] habits & practices. He, too, teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. This is the third person who, appearing in the world, appears for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.

'These are the three persons who, appearing in the world, appear for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.'

The Teacher,

Great Seer,

is first in the world;

following him, the disciple

with mind composed;

and then the erudite one

who follows the practice for one in training,

having entered into good         habits,

practices.

These three, chief

among beings divine & human,

giving light, proclaiming the Dhamma,

throw open the door to the Deathless,

release many from bondage.

Those who follow the path,

well-taught by the Caravan Leader

unsurpassed,

will put an end to stress

right here–

those heeding the message

of the One Well-Gone.