NUTRIMENT
ĀHĀRA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 12:11

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There he addressed the monks, 'Monks, there are these four nutriments for the maintenance of beings who have come into being or for the support of those in search of a place to be born. Which four? Physical food, gross or refined; contact as the second; intellectual intention the third; and consciousness the fourth. These are the four nutriments for the maintenance of beings who have come into being or for the support of those in search of a place to be born.

'Now, these four nutriments have what as their cause, what as their origination, what as their source, what as that which brings them into play? These four nutriments have craving as their cause, craving as their origination, craving as their source, craving as that which brings them into play.

'And this craving has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its source, what as that which brings it into play? … Feeling.…

'And this feeling has what as its cause…? … Contact.…

'And this contact has what as its cause…? … The six sense media.…

'And these six sense media have what as their cause…? … Name-&-form.…

'And this name-&-form has what as its cause…? … Consciousness.…

'And this consciousness has what as its cause…? … Fabrication.…

'And this fabrication has what as its cause, what as its origination, what as its source, what as that which brings it into play? Fabrication has ignorance as its cause, ignorance as its origination, ignorance as its source, ignorance as that which brings it into play.

'Thus, from ignorance as a requisite condition come fabrications.

'From fabrications as a requisite condition comes consciousness.

'From consciousness as a requisite condition comes name-&-form.

'From name-&-form as a requisite condition come the six sense media.

'From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes contact.

'From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling.

'From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving.

'From craving as a requisite condition comes clinging or sustenance.

'From clinging or sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming.

'From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth.

'From birth as a requisite condition, then aging & death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair come into play. Such is the origination of this entire mass of stress & suffering.

'Now from the remainderless fading & cessation of that very ignorance comes the cessation of fabrications. From the cessation of fabrications comes the cessation of consciousness. From the cessation of consciousness comes the cessation of name-&-form. From the cessation of name-&-form comes the cessation of the six sense media. From the cessation of the six sense media comes the cessation of contact. From the cessation of contact comes the cessation of feeling. From the cessation of feeling comes the cessation of craving. From the cessation of craving comes the cessation of clinging or sustenance. From the cessation of clinging or sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation of birth, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of stress & suffering.'