ABOUT SAMIDDHI
SAMIDDHI SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 1:20

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha at Tapodā monastery. Then Venerable Samiddhi, as night was ending, got up & went to the Tapodā Hot Springs to bathe his limbs. Having bathed his limbs and gotten out of the springs, he stood wearing only his lower robe, letting his limbs dry.

Then a certain devatā, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance lighting up the entire Tapodā Hot Springs, went to Venerable Samiddhi. On arrival, while standing in the air, she addressed him with this verse:

'Without having enjoyed

(sensual pleasures),

you go for alms, monk.

You don't go for alms

after having enjoyed.

Having enjoyed, monk,

then go for alms.

Don't let time pass you by.'

Venerable Samiddhi:

'I don't know my time.

My time

is hidden.

It can't be seen.

That's why, not having enjoyed,

I go for alms:

Don't let my time pass me by.'

Then the devatā, coming down to earth, said to Venerable Samiddhi, 'You have gone forth while young, monk—black-haired, endowed with the blessings of youth in the first stage of life—without having played with sensuality. Enjoy human sensuality, monk. Don't drop what is visible here & now in pursuit of what's subject to time.'

'My friend, I'm not dropping what's visible here & now in pursuit of what's subject to time. I'm dropping what's subject to time in pursuit of what's visible here & now. For the Blessed One has said that sensuality is subject to time, of much stress, much despair, & greater drawbacks; whereas this Dhamma is well taught by the Blessed One, visible here & now, timeless, inviting verification, pertinent, to be experienced by the observant for themselves.'

'But, monk, in what way has the Blessed One said that sensuality is subject to time, of much stress, much despair, & greater drawbacks? And how is this Dhamma visible here & now, timeless, inviting verification, pertinent, to be experienced by the observant for themselves?'

'I'm new, my friend, not long gone forth, only recently come to this Dhamma & discipline. I can't explain it in detail. But the Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened, is staying here near Rājagaha at Tapodā monastery. Having gone to him, ask him this matter. As he explains it, that's how you should remember it.'

'Monk, it's not easy for us to go to the Blessed One, as he is surrounded by other devas of great influence. But if you go to the Blessed One and ask him this matter, I will come along to hear the Dhamma.'

Responding to the devatā, 'As you say, my friend,' Venerable Samiddhi went to the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there [he told the Blessed One his entire conversation with the devatā]. 'Now, lord, if that devatā was telling the truth, she is not far from here.'

When this was said, the devatā said to Venerable Samiddhi, 'Ask, monk! Ask! I've gotten through.'

Then the Blessed One recited this verse to the devatā:

'Perceiving in terms of signs, beings

take a stand on signs.

Not fully comprehending signs, they

come into the bonds

of death.

But fully comprehending signs, one

doesn't suppose

a signifier.

Yet nothing exists for him

by which one would say,

'To him no thought occurs.'

If you know this, spirit, then say so.'

'I don't understand, lord, the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement. It would be good if the Blessed One would speak in such a way that I would understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement.'

The Buddha:

'Whoever supposes

'equal,'

'superior,' or

'inferior,'

by that he'd dispute.

Whereas to one unaffected by these three,

'equal'

'superior'

do not occur.

If you know this, spirit, then say so.'

'I don't understand, lord, the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement. It would be good if the Blessed One would speak in such a way that I would understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement.'

The Buddha:

'Having

shed classifications,

gone beyond conceit,

he has here

cut

through craving

for name

& form:

This one—

his bonds cut through,

free

from trouble,

from longing—

though they search, they can't find him,

human beings & devas,

here & beyond,

in heaven

or any abode.

If you know this, spirit, then say so.'

'Lord, here's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement:

In all the world,

every world,

you should do no evil

with         speech,

body,

or mind.

Having abandoned sensuality

—mindful, alert—

don't consort

with suffering & stress,

with what doesn't pertain

to the goal.'