SUBJECT TO ORIGINATION (1)
SAMUDAYA-DHAMMA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 22:126

At Sāvatthī. Then a certain monk went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, 'Ignorance, ignorance,' it is said, lord. Which ignorance? And to what extent is one immersed in ignorance?'

'There is the case, monk, where an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person doesn't discern, as it has come to be, form subject to origination as form subject to origination. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, form subject to passing away as form subject to passing away. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, form subject to origination & passing away as form subject to origination & passing away.

'He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, feeling subject to origination as feeling subject to origination. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, feeling subject to passing away as feeling subject to passing away. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, feeling subject to origination & passing away as feeling subject to origination & passing away.

'He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, perception subject to origination as perception subject to origination. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, perception subject to passing away as perception subject to passing away. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, perception subject to origination & passing away as perception subject to origination & passing away.

'He doesn't discern, as it they have come to be, fabrications subject to origination as fabrications subject to origination. He doesn't discern, as they have come to be, fabrications subject to passing away as fabrications subject to passing away. He doesn't discern, as they have come to be, fabrications subject to origination & passing away as fabrications subject to origination & passing away.

'He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, consciousness subject to origination as consciousness subject to origination. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, consciousness subject to passing away as consciousness subject to passing away. He doesn't discern, as it has come to be, consciousness subject to origination & passing away as consciousness subject to origination & passing away.

'This, monk, is called ignorance, and it's to this extent that one is immersed in ignorance.'