A BEING
SATTA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 23:2

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Venerable Rādha went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One: 'A being,' lord. 'A being,' it's said. To what extent is one said to be 'a being'?'

'Any desire, passion, delight, or craving for form, Rādha: when one is caught up [satta] there, tied up [visatta] there, one is said to be 'a being [satta].'

'Any desire, passion, delight, or craving for feeling… perception… fabrications…

'Any desire, passion, delight, or craving for consciousness, Rādha: when one is caught up there, tied up there, one is said to be 'a being.'

'Just as when boys or girls are playing with little sand castles (lit: dirt houses): as long as they are not free from passion, desire, love, thirst, fever, & craving for those little sand castles, that's how long they have fun with those sand castles, enjoy them, treasure them, feel possessive of them. But when they become free from passion, desire, love, thirst, fever, & craving for those little sand castles, then they smash them, scatter them, demolish them with their hands or feet and make them unfit for play.

'In the same way, Rādha, you too should smash, scatter, & demolish form, and make it unfit for play. Practice for the ending of craving for form.

'You should smash, scatter, & demolish feeling, and make it unfit for play. Practice for the ending of craving for feeling.

'You should smash, scatter, & demolish perception, and make it unfit for play. Practice for the ending of craving for perception.

'You should smash, scatter, & demolish fabrications, and make them unfit for play. Practice for the ending of craving for fabrications.

'You should smash, scatter, & demolish consciousness and make it unfit for play. Practice for the ending of craving for consciousness—because the ending of craving, Rādha, is unbinding.'