Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, the eye is inconstant, changeable, alterable. The ear… The nose… The tongue… The body… The mind is inconstant, changeable, alterable.




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, forms are inconstant, changeable, alterable. Sounds.… Aromas.… Flavors.… Tactile sensations.… Ideas are inconstant, changeable, alterable.…




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, eye-consciousness is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Ear-consciousness.… Nose-consciousness.… Tongue-consciousness.… Body-consciousness.… Intellect-consciousness is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, eye-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Ear-contact.… Nose-contact.… Tongue-contact.… Body-contact.… Intellect-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable…




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, feeling born of eye-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Feeling born of ear-contact.… Feeling born of nose-contact.… Feeling born of tongue-contact.… Feeling born of body-contact.… Feeling born of intellect-contact is inconstant, changeable, alterable…




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, perception of forms is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Perception of sounds.… Perception of smells.… Perception of tastes.… Perception of tactile sensations.… Perception of ideas is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, intention for forms is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Intention for sounds.… Intention for smells.… Intention for tastes.… Intention for tactile sensations.… Intention for ideas is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, craving for forms is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Craving for sounds.… Craving for smells.… Craving for tastes.… Craving for tactile sensations.… Craving for ideas is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…


PROPERTIES
DHĀTU SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 25:9

Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, the earth property is inconstant, changeable, alterable. The liquid property.… The fire property.… The wind property.… The space property.… The consciousness property is inconstant, changeable, alterable.…

'One who has conviction & belief that these phenomena are this way is called a faith-follower: one who has entered the orderliness of rightness, entered the plane of people of integrity, transcended the plane of the run-of-the-mill. He is incapable of doing any deed by which he might be reborn in hell, in the animal womb, or in the realm of hungry ghosts. He is incapable of passing away until he has realized the fruit of stream-entry.

'One who, after pondering with a modicum of discernment, has accepted that these phenomena are this way is called a Dhamma-follower: one who has entered the orderliness of rightness, entered the plane of people of integrity, transcended the plane of the run-of-the-mill. He is incapable of doing any deed by which he might be reborn in hell, in the animal womb, or in the realm of hungry ghosts. He is incapable of passing away until he has realized the fruit of stream-entry.

'One who knows and sees that these phenomena are this way is called a stream-enterer, steadfast, never again destined for states of woe, headed for self-awakening.'




Near Sāvatthī. 'Monks, form is inconstant, changeable, alterable. Feeling.… Perception.… Fabrications.… Consciousness is inconstant, changeable, alterable.