THE CHARIOT
RATHA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 35:198

'Endowed with three qualities, a monk dwells full of happiness & joy in the here & now, and has initiated a source for the ending of the effluents. Which three? He is one who guards the doors to his sense faculties, knows moderation in eating, & is devoted to wakefulness.

'And how is a monk one who guard the doors to his sense faculties? There is the case where a monk, on seeing a form with the eye, doesn't grasp at any theme or variations by which—if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the eye—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. He practices with restraint. He guards the faculty of the eye. He achieves restraint with regard to the faculty of the eye.

'On hearing a sound with the ear…

'On smelling an aroma with the nose…

'On tasting a flavor with the tongue…

'On touching a tactile sensation with the body…

'On cognizing an idea with the intellect, he doesn't grasp at any theme or variations by which—if he were to dwell without restraint over the faculty of the intellect—evil, unskillful qualities such as greed or distress might assail him. He practices with restraint. He guards the faculty of the intellect. He achieves restraint with regard to the faculty of the intellect.

'Suppose there were a chariot on level ground at four crossroads, harnessed to thoroughbreds, waiting with whips lying ready, so that a dexterous driver, a trainer of tamable horses, might mount and—taking the reins with his left hand and the whip with his right—drive out & back, to whatever place & by whichever road he liked; in the same way, the monk trains for the protection of these six senses, for their restraint, for their taming, for their stilling.

'This is how a monk is one who guards the doors to his sense faculties.

'And how is a monk one who knows moderation in eating? There is the case where a monk, considering it appropriately, takes his food not playfully, nor for intoxication, nor for putting on bulk, nor for beautification, but simply for the survival & continuance of this body, for ending its afflictions, for the support of the holy life, thinking, 'I will destroy old feelings [of hunger] & not create new feelings [from overeating]. Thus I will maintain myself, be blameless, & live in comfort.'

'Just as a person anoints a wound simply for its healing, or greases an axle simply for the sake of carrying a load, in the same way a monk, considering it appropriately, takes his food not playfully, nor for intoxication, nor for putting on bulk, nor for beautification, but simply for the survival & continuance of this body, for ending its afflictions, for the support of the holy life, thinking, 'I will destroy old feelings [of hunger] & not create new feelings [from overeating]. Thus I will maintain myself, be blameless, & live in comfort.'

'This is how a monk is one who knows moderation in eating.

'And how is a monk one who is devoted to wakefulness? There is the case where a monk during the day, sitting & pacing back & forth, cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check. During the first watch of the night [dusk to 10 p m], sitting & pacing back & forth, he cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check. During the second watch of the night [10 p m to 2 a m], reclining on his right side, he takes up the lion's posture, one foot placed on top of the other, mindful, alert, with his mind set on getting up [either as soon as he awakens or at a particular time]. During the last watch of the night [2 a m to dawn], sitting & pacing back & forth, he cleanses his mind of any qualities that would hold the mind in check.

'This is how a monk is one who is devoted to wakefulness.

'Endowed with these three qualities, a monk dwells full of happiness & joy in the here & now, and has initiated a source for the ending of the effluents.'