WITH SABHIYA
SABHIYA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 44:11

On one occasion Venerable Sabhiya Kaccāna was staying at Ñātika in the Brick Hall. Then Vacchagotta the wanderer went to him and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to Venerable Sabhiya Kaccāna, 'Now then, Master Kaccāna, does the Tathāgata exist after death?'

'Vaccha, that has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata exists after death.'

'Well then, Master Kaccāna, does the Tathāgata not exist after death?'

'Vaccha, that too has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata does not exist after death.'

'Then does the Tathāgata both exist and not exist after death?'

'That has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death.'

'Well then, does the Tathāgata neither exist nor not exist after death?'

'That too has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.'

'Now, Master Kaccāna, when asked if the Tathāgata exists after death, you say, 'That has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata exists after death.' When asked if the Tathāgata does not exist after death, you say, 'That too has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata does not exist after death.' When asked if the Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death, you say, 'That has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death.' When asked if the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death, you say, 'That too has not been declared by the Blessed One: 'The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.' Now, what is the cause, what is the reason, why that has not been declared by the contemplative Gotama?'

'Vaccha, whatever cause, whatever reason there would be for describing him as 'possessed of form' or 'formless' or 'percipient' or 'non-percipient' or 'neither percipient nor non-percipient': If that cause, that reason, were to cease totally everywhere, totally in every way without remainder, then describing him by what means would one describe him as 'possessed of form' or 'formless' or 'percipient' or 'non-percipient' or 'neither percipient nor non-percipient'?'

'How long has it been since you went forth, Master Kaccāna?'

'Not long, my friend. Three years.'

'Whoever has gained just this much in this much time has gained a great deal, my friend—to say nothing of what he has thus gone beyond.'