ILL
GILĀNA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 46:14

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Forest, the Squirrels' Sanctuary. And on that occasion Venerable Mahā Kassapa was staying in the Pepper Tree Cave: diseased, in pain, severely ill. Then the Blessed One, emerging from his seclusion in the evening, went to Venerable Mahā Kassapa and, on arrival, sat down on a seat made ready. Having sat down, he said to Venerable Mahā Kassapa, 'I hope you are getting better, Kassapa. I hope you are comfortable. I hope that your pains are lessening and not increasing. I hope that there are signs of their lessening, and not of their increasing.'

'I am not getting better, lord. I am not comfortable. My extreme pains are increasing, not lessening. There are signs of their increasing, and not of their lessening.'

'Kassapa, these seven factors for awakening rightly taught by me, when developed and pursued, lead to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to unbinding. Which seven?

'Mindfulness as a factor for awakening rightly taught by me, when developed and pursued, leads to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to unbinding.

'Analysis of qualities as a factor for awakening, rightly taught by me, when developed and pursued, leads to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to unbinding.

'Persistence as a factor for awakening.…

'Rapture as a factor for awakening.…

'Calm as a factor for awakening.…

'Concentration as a factor for awakening.…

'Equanimity as a factor for awakening rightly taught by me, when developed and pursued, leads to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to unbinding.

'Kassapa, these are the seven factors for awakening rightly taught by me that—when developed and pursued—lead to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to unbinding.'

'They are indeed factors for awakening, O Blessed One. They are indeed factors for awakening, O One Well-Gone.'

That is what the Blessed One said. Gratified, Venerable Mahā Kassapa delighted in the Blessed One's words. And Venerable Mahā Kassapa recovered from his disease. That was how Venerable Mahā Kassapa's disease was abandoned.