AN ANALYSIS (OF THE FEELING FACULTIES) (4)
VIBHAṄGA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 48:39

'Monks, there are these five faculties. Which five? The pleasure-faculty, the pain-faculty, the happiness-faculty, the distress-faculty, the equanimity-faculty.

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as pleasure, the pleasure-faculty arises. Being eased, one discerns, 'I am eased.' With the cessation of that very contact to be experienced as pleasure, one discerns, 'What was experienced as coming from that—the pleasure-faculty arising in dependence on a contact to be experienced as pleasure—ceases & grows still.'

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as pain, the pain-faculty arises. Being pained, one discerns, 'I am pained.' With the cessation of that very contact to be experienced as pain, one discerns, 'What was experienced as coming from that—the pain-faculty arising in dependence on a contact to be experienced as pain—ceases & grows still.'

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as happiness, the happiness-faculty arises. Being happy, one discerns, 'I am happy.' With the cessation of that very contact to be experienced as happiness, one discerns, 'What was experienced as coming from that—the happiness-faculty arising in dependence on a contact to be experienced as happiness—ceases & grows still.'

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as distress, the distress-faculty arises. Being distressed, one discerns, 'I am distressed.' With the cessation of that very contact to be experienced as distress, one discerns, 'What was experienced as coming from that—the distress-faculty arising in dependence on a contact to be experienced as distress—ceases & grows still.'

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as equanimity, the equanimity-faculty arises. Being equanimous, one discerns, 'I am equanimous.' With the cessation of that very contact to be experienced as equanimity, one discerns, 'What was experienced as coming from that—the equanimity-faculty arising in dependence on a contact to be experienced as equanimity—ceases & grows still.'

'Just as when, from the conjunction & combining of two fire sticks, heat is generated & fire produced, while from the separation & laying down of those fire sticks the heat coming from them ceases & grows still; in the same way, in dependence on a contact to be experienced as pleasure, the pleasure-faculty arises…

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as pain, the pain-faculty arises…

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as happiness, the happiness-faculty arises…

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as distress, the distress-faculty arises…

'In dependence on a contact to be experienced as equanimity, the equanimity-faculty arises. Being equanimous, one discerns, 'I am equanimous.' With the cessation of that very contact to be experienced as equanimity, one discerns, 'What was experienced as coming from that—the equanimity-faculty arising in dependence on a contact to be experienced as equanimity—ceases & grows still.'