BONANZAS (1)
ABHISANDA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 55:31

'Monks, there are these four bonanzas of merit, bonanzas of skillfulness, nourishments of bliss. Which four?

'There is the case where the disciple of the noble ones is endowed with verified confidence in the Awakened One: 'Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear-knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unexcelled trainer of people fit to be tamed, teacher of devas & human beings, awakened, blessed.' This is the first bonanza of merit, bonanza of skillfulness, nourishment of bliss.

'And further, the disciple of the noble ones is endowed with verified confidence in the Dhamma: 'The Dhamma is well taught by the Blessed One, to be seen here & now, timeless, inviting verification, pertinent, to be experienced by the observant for themselves.' This is the second bonanza of merit, bonanza of skillfulness, nourishment of bliss.

'And further, the disciple of the noble ones is endowed with verified confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Blessed One's disciples who have practiced well… who have practiced straight-forwardly… who have practiced methodically… who have practiced masterfully—in other words, the four types of noble disciples when taken as pairs, the eight when taken as individual types—they are the Saṅgha of the Blessed One's disciples: deserving of gifts, deserving of hospitality, deserving of offerings, deserving of respect, the incomparable field of merit for the world.' This is the third bonanza of merit, bonanza of skillfulness, nourishment of bliss.

'And further, the disciple of the noble ones is endowed with virtues that are appealing to the noble ones: untorn, unbroken, unspotted, unsplattered, liberating, praised by the observant, ungrasped at, leading to concentration. This is the fourth bonanza of merit, bonanza of skillfulness, nourishment of bliss.

'These are four bonanzas of merit, bonanzas of skillfulness, nourishments of bliss.'