ACACIA
KHADIRA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 56:32

'Monks, if anyone were to say, 'Without having broken through to the noble truth of stress as it has come to be, without having broken through to the noble truth of the origination of stress… the cessation of stress… the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress, as it has come to be, I will bring about the right ending of stress,' that would be an impossibility.

'Just as if anyone were to say, 'Having made a basket of acacia leaves or pine needles or myrobalan leaves, I will carry water or a palm fruit,' that would be an impossibility; in the same way, if anyone were to say, 'Without having broken through to the noble truth of stress as it has come to be, without having broken through to the noble truth of the origination of stress… the cessation of stress… the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress, as it has come to be, I will bring about the right ending of stress,' that would be an impossibility.

'But, monks, if anyone were to say, 'Having broken through to the noble truth of stress as it has come to be, having broken through to the noble truth of the origination of stress… the cessation of stress… the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress, as it has come to be, I will bring about the right ending of stress,' that would be a possibility.

'Just as if anyone were to say, 'Having made a basket of lotus leaves or kino leaves or māluva leaves, I will carry water or a palm fruit,' that would be a possibility; in the same way, if anyone were to say, 'Having broken through to the noble truth of stress as it has come to be, having broken through to the noble truth of the origination of stress… the cessation of stress… the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress, as it has come to be, I will bring about the right ending of stress,' that would be a possibility.

'Therefore, monks, your duty is the contemplation, 'This is stress … This is the origination of stress … This is the cessation of stress.' Your duty is the contemplation, 'This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress.'