TOTAL UNBINDING
PARINIBBĀNA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 6:15

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Kusinārā in Upavattana, the Sal Tree Forest of the Mallans, on the occasion of his total unbinding. Then the Blessed One addressed the monks, 'I exhort you, monks: All fabrications are subject to decay. Reach consummation through heedfulness.' That was the Tathāgata's last statement.

Then the Blessed One entered the first jhāna. Emerging from that he entered the second jhāna. Emerging from that, he entered the third… the fourth jhāna… the dimension of the infinitude of space… the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness… the dimension of nothingness… the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging from that, he entered the cessation of perception & feeling.

Then emerging from the cessation of perception & feeling, he entered the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging from that, he entered the dimension of nothingness… the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness… the dimension of the infinitude of space… the fourth jhāna… the third… the second… the first jhāna. Emerging from the first jhāna he entered the second… the third… the fourth jhāna. Emerging from the fourth jhāna, he immediately totally unbound.

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Sahampati Brahmā uttered this verse:

'All beings—all—in the world,

will cast off the bodily heap

in the world

where a Teacher like this

without peer in the world

the Tathāgata, with strength attained,

the Rightly Self-Awakened One,

has totally

unbound.'

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Sakka, ruler of the gods, uttered this verse:

'How inconstant are fabrications!

Their nature:      to arise & pass away.

They disband      as they are arising.

Their total stilling is bliss.'

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Venerable Ānanda uttered this verse:

'It was awe-inspiring.

It was hair-raising

when,      displaying the foremost

accomplishment in all things,

the Rightly Self-Awakened One

totally unbound.'

When the Blessed One totally unbound, simultaneously with the total unbinding, Venerable Anuruddha uttered this verse:

'He had no in-&-out breathing,

the one who was Such, the firm-minded one,

imperturbable

& bent on peace:

the sage completing his span.

With heart unbowed

he endured the pain.

Like a flame's unbinding

was the liberation

of awareness.'