FIREWOOD-GATHERING
KAṬṬHAHĀRAKA SUTTA  Saṁyutta Nikāya 7:18

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. Then a large number of firewood-gathering youths—students of a certain brahman of the Bhāradvāja clan—went to the forest grove. On arrival, they saw the Blessed One sitting in the grove—his legs folded crosswise, his body set straight, mindfulness established to the fore. On seeing him, they went to the brahman of the Bhāradvāja clan and, on arrival, said to him, 'Sir, you should know that Gotama the contemplative is in that grove over there, sitting with his legs folded crosswise, his body set straight, mindfulness established to the fore.

So the brahman of the Bhāradvāja clan, together with the youths, went to the forest grove. On arrival, he saw the Blessed One sitting in the grove—his legs folded crosswise, his body set straight, mindfulness established to the fore. On seeing him, he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, addressed him in verse:

'In the deep-looking forest,

teeming with terrors,

having plunged into the wilderness

—desolate, empty—

unflinchingly, steadfastly, compellingly,

you practice jhāna, monk:

How very lovely you look!

Where no song is sung,

where no music is played,

alone in the wilderness:

the forest-dwelling sage.

This looks amazing to me—

that you live alone in the forest

with rapturous mind.

I suppose it's in longing

for the three heavens unexcelled,

in the company of the ruling lord of the worlds,

that, staying here in the wilderness, desolate,

you practice austerities

for attaining Brahmā.'

The Buddha:

'Whatever the longings or delights

attached—always—

to various levels of being,

or yearnings born

from the root of unknowing:

I've destroyed them all,

down to the root.

I—

without longing,

unattached,

uninvolved,

with purified vision

with regard to all things,

having reached self-awakening,

sublime, unexcelled—

practice jhāna hidden from Brahmā,

matured.'